record_id=1637 pmid=39808161 doi=10.1158/1055-9965.epi-24-1325 pmcid=PMC11968240
TITLE: Cancer Incidence in the Hispanic Community Health Study/Study of Latinos (HCHS/SOL)—The Onco-SOL Ancillary Study

INTRODUCTION
Cancer is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality among United States (US) Hispanic/Latino adults, with an estimated 195,000 new cases and over 50,000 cancer-related deaths occurring annually (1). The most frequently diagnosed cancers in Hispanic/Latino men are cancers of the prostate, colon and rectum, and kidney and renal pelvis and the most frequently diagnosed cancers among Hispanic/Latina women are cancers of the breast, uterine corpus, and colon and rectum. Together, these account for 45% of all cancer diagnoses among Hispanic/Latino adults (1). Although the age-adjusted incidence rates for all cancers combined are lower among Hispanic/Latino adults [367.0 per 100,000 men and 347.8 per 100,000 women; SEER 22 2017-2021 (2)] than among non-Hispanic white adults [510.7 per 100,000 men and 447.0.8 per 100,000 women; SEER 22 2017-2021 (2)], Hispanic/Latino adults are diagnosed with cancer at younger ages (3) and experience higher rates of diet-, metabolic-, and infection-related cancers including cancers of the stomach, liver, and cervix compared to non-Hispanic white adults (although these are relatively rare) (1).
The disaggregation of Hispanics/Latinos by heritage group, ancestry, or country of origin is critical for understanding the burden of cancer among Hispanic/Latino people, given that they vary substantially in genetic (4), cultural (5,6), behavioral (7,8), and other factors that impact cancer risk. Although studies are limited, important differences in cancer screening and detection as well as cancer-specific mortality by Hispanic/Latino heritage have been documented (9-14). For example, using the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) Program, Dobbs and colleagues reported that Hispanic/Latino men of Mexican, Cuban, and Puerto Rican descent present with higher prostate-specific antigen levels and more advanced clinical stage at the time of prostate cancer diagnosis compared to men of Dominican, South American, and Central American heritage (9). Using Florida Cancer Registry data, Pinheiro and colleagues reported that men of Cuban and Puerto Rican descent had higher cancer incidence and mortality rates than men of other Hispanic/Latino heritages (10-13). Moreover, using data from the Puerto Rico Central Cancer Registry, Tortolero-Luna and colleagues reported that the age-adjusted incidence of papillary thyroid carcinoma was higher in Puerto Rican women compared to mainland Hispanic/Latina women (14). A critical research gap remains in the examination of cancer incidence rates across Hispanic/Latino heritage groups and a comprehensive interrogation of the environmental, behavioral, and genetic determinants of cancer risk especially those factors that vary by Hispanic/Latino heritage. Few data sources exist that have sufficient sample size, specific Hispanic/Latino heritage detail, and measures of individual determinants of cancer risk, but population-based cohorts are particularly well suited for these kinds of studies.
Given this background, the objectives of the present study were to describe the burden of cancer among participants in the Hispanic Community Health Study/Study of Latinos (HCHS/SOL), an ongoing population-based cohort study of Hispanic/Latino adults of diverse backgrounds in the US. We undertook activities to link HCHS/SOL with four statewide population-based cancer registries then estimated cancer incidence rates overall and for screen-detectable cancers, which may be amenable to screening interventions, and etiologically grouped cancers including tobacco-related and obesity-related cancers, which are established leading causes of cancer. These rates were then explored by sex and by Hispanic/Latino heritage. As has been previously proposed (15), we hypothesized that cancer incidence rates vary by Hispanic/Latino heritage group and sex and that disparities in cancer incidence are masked by the aggregation of Hispanics/Latinos into a single group.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Population
The Oncological Study of Latinos (Onco-SOL) is ancillary to the main HCHS/SOL cohort. Details of the HCHS/SOL sampling and study design, participant recruitment and enrollment, and clinical procedures have been previously published (16). Briefly, between 2008-2011, 16,415 adults aged 18-74 at screening who self-identified as Hispanic or Latino (including those of Cuban, Dominican, Mexican, Puerto Rican, or Central or South American descent) were enrolled across four US communities (the Bronx, New York; Chicago, Illinois; Miami, Florida; and San Diego, California). HCHS/SOL participants were recruited using probability-based sampling (17), wherein a two-stage area probability sample of households was selected with stratification and oversampling incorporated at each stage to provide a broadly diverse sample. Sampling weights were then generated to reflect the unequal probabilities of selection at each stage as the product of a base weight and three multiplicative adjustments (nonresponse relative to the sampling frame; trimming to reduce the variability of the weights and the impact of extremely large weight values; and calibration to the 2010 US Census according to age, sex, and Hispanic/Latino background). Incorporating the sampling weights in the analysis enabled us to make inferences about the target population (i.e., Hispanic/Latino adults residing in the four US sampling areas). At baseline, HCHS/SOL participants underwent an extensive clinical exam and completed an interviewer-administered questionnaire that elicited information on known and suspected risk and protective factors for chronic health conditions including cancer.
The HCHS/SOL study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at each of the four HCHS/SOL field centers and coordinating center, and all participants provided written informed consent prior to participating in study activities.
Ascertainment of Cancer Incidence
Cancer incidence was ascertained by completing record linkages of the 16,415 HCHS/SOL participants to the statewide cancer registries of New York, Illinois, Florida, and California, where HCHS/SOL baseline recruitment sites were located. The data linkage criteria employed included first name, middle name, last name, social security number, date of birth, sex, street address, city, and zip code. Incident cancers were defined as new diagnoses of invasive cancers that occurred between the HCHS/SOL baseline visit in 2008-2011 and December 31, 2019 (California Cancer Registry), December 31, 2020 (Florida Cancer Registry), or December 31, 2021 (New York State and Illinois State Cancer Registries), with follow-up dates based on the availability of data at the time of approval of the cancer registry application or completion of the registry linkage. We censored follow-up time at the time of death for deceased participants (described below) or at the end date of the relevant registry follow-up. Primary data obtained from the state cancer registries included date of and age at cancer diagnosis, primary cancer site, as well as histology and behavior codes. Primary cancer site and histology were coded according to the International Classification of Diseases for Oncology Third Edition (ICD-O-3) (18). All linked state cancer registries follow the North American Association of Central Cancer Registries (NAACCR) Data Standards and Data Dictionary (RRID:SCR_026199). The linkage resulted in 1,006 registry record matches. We excluded records with a date of diagnosis prior to the date of completion of the HCHS/SOL baseline clinical exam (n=106); records of benign (n=34), uncertain/borderline (n=3), or in situ disease (n=81); and records indicating a subsequent cancer based on the date of diagnosis or sequence number (n=67) resulting in a total of 715 incident invasive cancers diagnosed between 2008 and 2021. The distribution of numbers of incident cancers by state cancer registry is as follows: 229 from the New York State Cancer Registry, 195 from the Florida Cancer Registry, 171 from the California Cancer Registry, and 120 from the Illinois State Cancer Registry.
We examined the risk of overall cancer incidence (i.e., all cancers combined) as well as the risk of screen-detectable cancers (ICD-O-3/histology codes) (19): colon (C18.0-18.9); rectosigmoid junction (C19.9); rectum (C20.9); other and ill-defined digestive organs (C26.0-C26.9); female breast (C50.0-50.9), cervix (C53.0-53.9), and prostate (C61.9); and risk of groups of cancers that share common etiology such as tobacco-related cancers (19): lip, oral cavity, and pharynx (C00.0-14.8), esophagus (C15.0-15.9), pancreas (C25.0-25.9), nasal cavity (C30.0); accessory sinuses (C31.0-C31.9); larynx (C32.0-32.9), trachea (C33.9), bronchus and lung (C34.0-34.9), kidney (C64.9), renal pelvis (C65.9); ureter (C66.9); bladder (C67.0-C67.9); and urethra (C68.0); and obesity-related cancers (20): adenocarcinoma of the esophagus (C15.0-15.9/8140); gastric cardia (C16.0); colon (C18.0-18.9); rectum (C20.9); liver and intrahepatic bile duct (C22.0-22.1); gallbladder (C23.9); pancreas (C25.0-25.9); multiple myeloma (C42.1/9732); female breast (C50.0-50.9) among women who were postmenopausal at baseline or ≥52 years at diagnosis; corpus uteri (C54.0-54.9); ovary (C56.9); kidney (C64.9); meninges (C70.0-70.9); and thyroid (C73.9).
Ascertainment of Vital Status
Vital status was ascertained by proxy report during annual follow-up telephone calls, death certificates provided by next of kin, and by completing record linkages of the 16,415 HCHS/SOL study participants to the National Death Index (NDI; RRID:SCR_016369), as previously reported (21). Mortality follow-up extended from the date of the baseline clinical assessment in 2008-2011 through December 31, 2021, with deceased participants censored at the time of death if the date of death occurred before the end of the registry follow-up, otherwise they were censored at the end of the registry follow-up.
Covariates
The following covariates were used to describe the HCHS/SOL participants and the target population at baseline: age (continuous in years and categorical, 18-49, 50-59, 60-69, or 70-75 years); sex (female or male); US born or years in the US (yes, born in one of the 50 US states or DC; or no, foreign-born and <20 or ≥20 years in the US), education (<high school, high school graduate, or >high school), percent of poverty defined as the ratio of household income in US dollars to the poverty threshold, multiplied by 100 (≤100%, 101-200%, or >200%); marital status (unmarried or married/ living with a partner); cigarette smoking status and pack-years (never smoker; former smoker with <10 or ≥10 pack-years; or current smoker with <10 or ≥10 pack-years); body mass index (BMI) computed from measured height and weight (continuous in kg/m2, and categorical, <25.0; 25.0-29.9; or ≥30 kg/m2); diet quality assessed using the Alternative Healthy Eating Index-2010 [AHEI-2010; continuous ranging from 0-110 with higher scores indicating healthier diets (22)], self-reported history of cancer (yes or no); health insurance status (yes or no); and language preference (Spanish or English).
Statistical Analysis
We used descriptive statistics to characterize the HCHS/SOL study sample (using unweighted frequencies) and the HCHS/SOL target population (using weighted percentages and weighted means and standard errors, SEs), overall and by Hispanic/Latino heritage group. We used Poisson regression with an offset for time (calculated as the number of days from the HCHS/SOL baseline clinical assessment to the date of cancer diagnosis, death, or censoring) and incorporated the survey design weights to estimate the age-adjusted incidence rates (IRs) of cancer per 10,000 (10K) person-years (py) overall and by strata of the selected baseline characteristics. We used Cox regression incorporating the survey design weights to estimate age- and sex-adjusted or age- and sex-stratified hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% CIs in association with Hispanic/Latino heritage comparing hazard rates for each of the heritage groups to the hazard rates of those of Mexican descent, the largest heritage group in HCHS/SOL. We examined HRs of cancer overall, for screen-detectable cancers, and for the etiologically grouped cancers (tobacco-related or obesity-related cancers). In sensitivity analyses, we excluded participants who self-reported a history of cancer at the baseline visit (n=644).
All analyses were conducted using SAS Version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, North Carolina) and R Version 4.2 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing)/RStudio Version 2023.12.1 and used a complete case-analysis.
Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available on request from the HCHS/SOL: https://sites.cscc.unc.edu/hchs/. The data are not publicly available due to privacy or ethical restrictions.
RESULTS
The unweighted frequencies for the HCHS/SOL participant characteristics and the weighted statistics for the HCHS/SOL target populations are reported in Table 1. Less than 15% of the target population was 60 years of age or older at baseline, which varied by Hispanic/Latino heritage ranging from 9.6% among those of Mexican descent to 23.9% of those of Cuban descent. Most (77.1%) of the target population was born outside of the 50 United States/DC, while 27.2% of the target population was not born in the US but had lived in the US for ≥20 years. By heritage, 37.9% of those of Puerto Rican descent had lived in the Continental US for ≥20 years compared to 20.0% of those of Cuban descent. Smoking history also varied by Hispanic/Latino heritage, with 3.2% of those of Mexican heritage reporting current cigarette smoking and ≥10 pack-years of smoking history compared to 15.6% of those of Puerto Rican descent and 17.8% of those of Cuban descent. The prevalence of obesity (BMI≥30 kg/m2) was lowest among those of South American descent at 29.8% and highest among those of Puerto Rican (46.7%) and Dominican (40.8%) descent.
Over an average follow-up of 10.7 years (5th percentile=7.4, 95th percentile=13.1 years), 715 incident invasive cancers were diagnosed in the HCHS/SOL cohort including the following 10 cancers (in descending frequency): female breast (nunweighted=118); prostate (nunweighted=102); bronchus and lung (nunweighted=79); colon and rectum (n nunweighted=52); corpus uterus (nunweighted=46); liver and intrahepatic bile duct (nunweighted=33); lymph nodes (nunweighted=33); thyroid (nunweighted=28), and stomach (nunweighted=25), which comprised 72.2% of the diagnosed cancers (Figure 1). A full listing of all 715 incident cancers is provided in Supplementary Table S1. About 40% of the cancers were screen-detectable cancers (n=282), 22% (n=154) were tobacco-related cancers, and 46% (n=330) were obesity-related cancers (cancer groups were not mutually exclusive). The weighted mean age at cancer diagnosis was 63.4 (SE=0.74) years and the weighted median age at cancer diagnosis was 65.0 (IQR=56.0-72.0) years. By Hispanic/Latino heritage, the three most frequently diagnosed cancers among those of Dominican, Cuban, and Puerto Rican descent were cancers of the breast, prostate, and bronchus and lung; however, the three most frequently diagnosed cancers among those of Mexican, Central American, and South American descent were cancers of the breast, prostate, and hematopoietic and reticuloendothelial systems.
In Table 3, we present the weighted age- and sex-adjusted and age- and sex-stratified HRs by Hispanic/Latino heritage, comparing all groups to those of Mexican descent. HRs were higher among those of Puerto Rican, Cuban, and Dominican descent for all cancers combined and for tobacco-related cancers. For obesity-related cancers, the only statistically significantly elevated HR was among those of Puerto Rican descent (HR=2.37, 95%CI=1.43-3.95). Among women of Puerto Rican descent, compared to women of Mexican descent, HRs were elevated for all cancers combined (HR=2.09, 95%CI=1.32-3.30), for tobacco-related cancers (HR=3.38, 95%CI=1.62-7.07); and for obesity-related cancers (HR=2.48, 95%CI=1.36-4.53). HRs of tobacco-related cancers were also statistically significantly elevated among women of Cuban descent (HR=3.20, 95%CI=1.39-7.39). Among men, HRs were elevated among those of Puerto Rican (HR=1.74, 95%CI=1.10-2.76) and Cuban (HR=1.68, 95%CI=1.07-2.62) descent for all cancers combined and were elevated among Puerto Rican men for tobacco-related (HR=2.81, 95%CI=1.10-7.18) and obesity-related (HR=2.10, 95%CI=0.96-4.61) cancers. Results were similar when we excluded participants with a self-reported history of cancer at baseline (Supplementary Table S2).
DISCUSSION
In this study of Hispanic/Latino adults of diverse backgrounds, we described the patterns and incidence rates of cancer overall, for screen-detectable cancers, and for subsets of cancers that share common etiologic factors including tobacco-related and obesity-related cancers. The most frequently diagnosed cancers included cancers of the female breast, prostate, bronchus and lung, which mirror those of the general US population (23) and those of the general US Hispanic/Latino population (1). By heritage, adults of Puerto Rican descent had the highest age-adjusted rates of cancer overall [although estimates were similar to national estimates for Hispanic/Latino adults, which are lower than those in non-Hispanic White adults (2)] as well as screen-detectable, tobacco-related, and obesity-related cancers. Adults of Cuban and Dominican descent had the next highest rates of cancer, while adults of Mexican and Central American descent had the lowest rates of cancer. When we estimated the age- and sex-adjusted hazard ratios of cancer risk comparing all groups to those of Mexican descent, those of Puerto Rican descent had almost a two-fold increase in the risk of cancer overall, a more than two-fold increase in the risk of obesity-related cancers, and a three-fold increase in the risk of tobacco-related cancers. Aside from age and Hispanic/Latino heritage, other characteristics associated with higher rates of cancer included being born in the 50 US states/DC (versus not being born in the 50 US states), having a high school education or higher (versus having less than a high school education), having high income relative to the federal poverty level (versus having low income relative to the federal poverty level), and having health insurance (versus not having health insurance).
Pinheiro and colleagues describe the importance of disaggregating cancer incidence and mortality rates by Hispanic/Latino heritage (15), given that overall cancer incidence rates among Hispanic/Latino adults are lower than those of non-Hispanic white adults (2) but the aggregation of rates across all groups may mask disparities within Hispanic/Latino adults. Pinheiro and colleagues have also provided empirical evidence demonstrating disparities in cancer incidence and mortality by Hispanic/Latino heritage, particularly among men of Puerto Rican and Cuban heritage living in Florida, with similar patterns reported of lower cancer risk in Mexican heritage adults and higher risk among adults of Puerto Rican heritage. Other studies have reported that the risk of certain cancers differs two- to five-fold between Hispanic populations based on place of birth and heritage (10,13,24,25). For example, prostate cancer incidence rates vary by Hispanic/Latino heritage, with the highest rates occurring among Puerto Ricans and Dominicans (129-133 per 100,000 person-years). In contrast, Mexicans have the lowest incidence rates (33 per 100,000 person-years) (13,26). This difference may be partly attributed to higher African ancestry admixture among Puerto Ricans and Dominicans; however, environmental and lifestyle factors, as well as access to care and cancer screening services, also undoubtedly contribute to this disparity (25). Rates of breast and colorectal cancer also vary among Hispanic/Latina heritage groups (25). However, this variability is difficult to capture because most data for Hispanics/Latinos are reported in aggregate, and the SEER data on Hispanics/Latinos are primarily obtained from cancer registries with populations that serve high proportions of Mexican Americans (RRID:SCR_006902). Thus, the other largest Hispanic/Latino heritage groups in the US are underrepresented in the SEER data (27).
The reasons why disparities in cancer incidence by Hispanic/Latino heritage arise are multifactorial and likely attributable to demographic, behavioral, and social differences between the groups. Persons of Mexican descent, who comprise 11.2% of the US population and close to 60% of the US Hispanic/Latino population, are younger on average than other Hispanic groups, including those of Cuban descent, as a result of differences in patterns of immigration of working-age persons (28). Given that age is the most important risk factor for cancer, differences in the population age structures between Hispanic/Latino heritage groups will influence the patterns of cancers that are diagnosed and the ages at which they are diagnosed. In this study, whereas lung cancer was one of the three most frequently diagnosed cancers among those of Dominican, Cuban, and Puerto Rican descent, this was not the case for those of Mexican, Central American, and South American descent, who were more frequently diagnosed with cancers of the hematopoietic and reticuloendothelial systems. HCHS/SOL has been instrumental in our understanding of the differences in behaviors that impact chronic disease risk including tobacco smoking (8), physical activity and sedentary behavior (7,29), diet (30), and obesity (31), which also shape the patterns of cancer. Concerning social factors, US Hispanic/Latino persons have higher levels of economic adversity compared to other racial or ethnic groups, including non-Hispanic white persons (32). This adversity results in reduced access to employment, housing, and education and reduces opportunities for participation in healthy behaviors while increasing opportunities for participation in unhealthy behaviors (32). However, in this study, the incidence rates of cancer were highest among participants of high socioeconomic status, as measured by income. Still, these differences may be attributed to health insurance status. Furthermore, these factors are likely also influenced by the level of acculturation. That those born in the US had higher rates of cancer compared to those born elsewhere is reflective of the immigrant paradox – the observation that more recent and less acculturated immigrants have better health outcomes than their US-born counterparts or non-Hispanic White adults, which diminishes with increased time in the US (33). Thus, it is important to continue to investigate how social determinants of health differentially impact cancer risk among Hispanic/Latino persons from different countries. A previous study by Zsembkik and Fennell using data from the 1997-2001 National Health Interview Surveys (NHIS) reported on the variation in the social determinants of health among Hispanic/Latinos including education and income. They noted that the negative effects of higher socioeconomic status on health, as we report in this study, was primarily true only for adults of Mexican origin. In contrast, higher socioeconomic status was associated with better health among those of Puerto Rican descent (34). In their study, and in a more recent study using NHIS data, variation in health insurance status was also reported; compared to other Hispanic/Latino adults, Hispanic/Latino adults of Mexican heritage were less likely to have health insurance coverage (35). Access to healthcare as a result of having health insurance is associated with increased cancer screening behaviors and with better short-term and long-term survival (36).
This study has several strengths. We leveraged the infrastructure the existing multi-site HCHS/SOL cohort, to investigate cancer risk through state cancer registry linkages. Participants of the HCHS/SOL are well-characterized, and the cohort allows us to generalize to the Hispanic/Latino adults residing in the target areas. While HCHS/SOL was established to understand risk and protective factors for cardiovascular disease and diabetes, many risk factors for these diseases and conditions also contribute to cancer risk. Thus, HCHS/SOL will provide an important resource for future studies to investigate cancer etiology in Hispanic/Latino populations and collaborative pooling projects to study those cancers that are rarer including those that have been shown to be of higher incidence in Hispanic/Latino adults including infection-related cancers, which we were unable to study in this study given the relatively low frequency of these cancers diagnosed to date. However, several limitations should be noted. HCHS/SOL participants were relatively young at baseline. Although we ascertained cancer outcomes over a mean follow-up of 10 years, the number of cancers diagnosed in this cohort is relatively low, and so the numbers of cancers for specific cancer sites are relatively small. There is potential for misclassification related to our etiologically relevant cancer groupings, which might bias results towards the null. However, incident cancers listed within these groupings were defined based on published literature and may change as the evidence accumulates in larger and more diverse cohort studies. Incident cancers were not adjudicated with medical records in the HCHS/SOL cohort, which will require additional resources, and may have resulted in potential outcome misclassification. However, all four state tumor registries that were used to link the HCHS/SOL cohort are part of the NAACCR and thus all cancers are ascertained and adjudicated according to national standards. Additionally, other factors might have contributed to potential under-ascertainment of incident cancer cases. First, we only queried the cancer registries in the four states in which the HCHS/SOL field centers are located. It is possible that participants who have moved out of these four states during follow-up of the cohort may have been diagnosed with cancer in another state, which we would not have captured here. Second, the social security number is a key matching factor in the registry linkage algorithm. Foreign-born individuals are less likely to have a social security number, which may have affected the linkage matching resulting in an under-ascertainment of cases. In HCHS/SOL, the proportion of participants with a social security number ranged by site from 41.8% to 79.7%. Third, Hispanic/Latino adults often have multiple surnames, which do not always appear consistently across databases. It is possible that differences in listings of surnames could have affected the record matches. Fourth, Hispanic/Latino adults, particularly those that live close to bordering states or (as in the case of San Diego HCHS/SOL participants) bordering countries, may receive care outside of the states that were queried or the USA. Lastly, it is likely that for the three registries that were queried in 2020 and 2021 (FL, NY, and IL), the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic may have affected the numbers of cancers diagnosed as a result of disruptions in health care, as is evident from cancer statistics reports of the general US population (23) which reported a 10% drop in the cancers diagnosed from 2019-2020 (37). Additional extensions of these state cancer registry linkages will be necessary to examine the impacts of the pandemic on the cancer incidence rates among Hispanic/Latino adults in these four states. Despite these limitations, this study provides a first step toward understanding the burden of cancer among diverse US Hispanic/Latino adults.
Conclusions
In this study of cancer risk among Hispanic/Latino adults, we found that cancer incidence rates vary by Hispanic/Latino heritage. We found relatively high cancer incidence rates among adults of Puerto Rican descent and lower rates among adults of Mexican, Central American, and South American descent. Some of these disparities are also evident for tobacco-related and obesity-related cancers, which are amenable to intervention. In future work, it will be important to characterize the behaviors and social determinants that impact cancer incidence and mortality risk by Hispanic/Latino heritage, as this may help to identify strategies to reduce the burden of cancer among all US Hispanic/Latino adults.
Supplementary Material
1
2
