record_id=210 pmid=34861613 doi=10.1016/j.canep.2021.102076 pmcid=PMC8817625
TITLE: Breast cancer incidence trends in Asian women aged 20 or older as compared to other ethnic women in the United States from 2000 to 2018 by time period, age and tumor stage

International studies have shown consistently that the incidence of female breast cancer was much higher in women of Europe and north America than in Asian women.1–11 For example, age-standardized female breast cancer incidence rates in 2006–2007 were 95.3, 94.5 and 88.6 cases per 100,000 women for the Netherland, France and USA as compared to 43.3, 43.2, and 25.6 cases per 100,000 women for Japan, China, and Thailand, respectively.2 These higher incidence rates were attributed to multiple factors, including low parity, delayed marriage and childbirth, low breast feeding, increased cancer screening, work and life related stress, lack of exercise, higher obesity rate, higher alcohol consumption and smoking, and differential food intakes.12–28 However, the increasing incidence in breast cancer in Asian women have been observed over the past 3 decades,2,29–35 largely due to adaption of western-style diets and lifestyle.2 Some international and migration studies found that those Asian women who immigrated to Europe or north America had higher breast cancer incidence rates than those women who continued to live in Asia,1 supporting the importance of environmental and lifestyle factors in the etiology of breast cancer. For example, Gomez and colleagues31 reported that age-adjusted incidence rates of invasive breast cancer increased for both US-born and foreign-born Asians from 1988 to 2004. The incidence rate was 120.6 cases per 100,000 person-years for US-born Asians and 76.3 cases for foreign-born Asians with the incidence rate ratio between US-born and foreign-born Asians at 1.58 (95% confidence interval of 1.53–1.63).31 A recent analysis based on the 18 SEER registries data showed that overall breast cancer incidence rates increased among Asian/Pacific Islander (1.7% per year), non-Hispanic black (0.4% per year), and Hispanic women (0.3% per year) but were stable in non-Hispanic white and American Indian/Alaska Native women between 2005 and 2014.9 From 2012 to 2016, the overall increase in breast cancer incidence in women was observed, which largely reflected a rise in local (early) stage disease.10 Our current study aimed to not only provide more detailed analyses on more recent breast cancer incidence trends from 2000 to 2018 by time periods, age groups and tumor stages, but also examine racial disparities in the risk of developing breast cancer by adjusting for age and stage in the regression models.
Methods
Data sources
The National Cancer Institute’s Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Public Use Data Set released in November 2020 were used for this study.36 The SEER program supports population-based tumor registries in nine areas (San Francisco/Oakland, San Jose-Monterey, Los Angeles, Greater California, Detroit, Seattle, Atlanta, Rural Georgia, and Greater Georgia) and 9 states (Alaska, Connecticut, Iowa, New Mexico, Utah, Hawaii, Louisiana, Kentucky, and New Jersey), accounting for 28% of the U.S. population. The estimated completeness of cancer case reporting in SEER areas was 97.7%.37 The SEER registries ascertain all newly diagnosed (incident) cancer cases from multiple reporting sources such as hospitals, outpatient clinics, laboratories, private medical practitioners, nursing/convalescent homes/hospices, autopsy reports and death certificates. Information includes tumor location and size; lymph node and distant organ metastases; histologic type and grade of tumor; demographic characteristics such as age, gender, race and marital status; and type of treatments provided in the first course of therapy within four months of initial therapy after diagnosis. This study was considered exempt for Institutional Review Board (IRB) review because it did not involve any patient contact and only had the analysis of de-identified SEER Public Use Data.
Study Population
Our study identified 1,129,564 women who were diagnosed with incident breast cancer at age 20 or older between 2000 and 2018 in 18 SEER registries. The denominator of population data included all women aged 20 or older in the same SEER areas that were provided in the SEER*Stat package.36 Of the 1,129,564 women with breast cancer, 802,790 were non-Hispanic whites (NHW), 119,175 were non-Hispanic blacks (NHB), 86,461 were non-Hispanic Asians/Pacific Islanders (API), 115,309 were Hispanic women, and 5,829 were American Indians and Alaska Natives (AIAN).
Study Variables
Race/ethnicity variable was classified into NHW, NHB, API, Hispanics, and AIAN. The patient socio-demographics included age at diagnosis (20–44, 45–54, 55 or older), year of diagnosis (2000 to 2018), and geographic areas (18 SEER registries). Tumor stage included local, regional, or distant stage. Hormone receptor positive breast cancer was defined if estrogen or progesterone receptor was positive.
Statistical Analysis
We utilized the SEER*Stat software (version 8.3.9) that was provided by the National Cancer Institute together with the SEER Data for analyses in cancer incidence rates and trends. Incidence of breast cancer in women was defined as a ratio of the number of women with a new breast cancer over the number of total female population at risk in the same SEER areas by year, which was presented in number of cases per 100,000 persons. Because age is a significant risk factor for cancer incidence, the incidence rates of breast cancer in all comparison groups by race/ethnicity or time periods that may consist of different age compositions should be standardized by age. Therefore, in this study the incidence rates were adjusted to the year 2000 standard US population by age. The age-adjusted incidence rates, 95% confidence intervals for incidence rates, incidence rate ratios ((IRR) and their 95% confidence intervals and annual percentage change (APC) of incidence rates were calculated from the SEER*Stat software. A p value <0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
Trend analyses showed that only NHW women had a decreasing trend in overall breast cancer incidence rates from 2000 to 2018, whereas all other ethnic women had a slightly increasing trend in breast cancer incidence rates (Figure 1). Table 2 presents the incidence rates and their changes by three time periods in calendar years for various ethnic women. Overall, annual percentage change (APC) from 2000 to 2018 showed that annual increase was statistically significant for API (APC: 1.0, 95% CI: 0.8–1.3), NHB (APC: 0.5, 0.2–0.7), AIAN (1.6, 1.1–2.2), and Hispanic women (0.4, 0.2–0.7) (see last column in Table 2). Overall annual percentage of incidence decreased but not significantly for NHW (−0.1, −0.4 to −0.1). Because the incidence appeared to increase after 2009, we also showed the most recent and available data on the trends from 2010 to 2018 by race/ethnicity in Supplement Figure S1 and Supplement Table S1, indicating significant increasing trend for API, NHW, and Hispanic women, but no significant change for NHB and AIAN. Table 3 presents the age-adjusted incidence rates by race/ethnicity that was stratified by hormone receptor status. The age-adjusted incidence rates of hormone receptor positive breast cancer increased over time from 2000 to 2018 in all race/ethnic women with no exception. The annual percentage change of incidence increase was greater in AIAN and NHB women, followed by API, Hispanic and NHW women. For hormone receptor negative breast cancer or hormone receptor unknown or at borderline, the incidence rates were decreasing over time in all ethnic women. The largest annual percentage decrease was observed in NHW women with hormone receptor unknown or at borderline breast cancer (−13.1%).
Discussion
This study examined the most recent breast cancer incidence trends among women in SEER areas from 2000 to 2018 by time periods, age groups and tumor stages, and explored racial disparities in the risk of developing breast cancer by adjusting for multiple confounding factors. Our study found that only NHW women had a decreasing trend in breast cancer incidence rates overall from 2000 to 2018, whereas all other ethnic women had a slightly increasing trend in breast cancer incidence. The decreasing trend in breast cancer incidence rates for NHW women was largely driven by the decreasing number of hormone receptor unknown or at borderline breast cancer. In those with hormone receptor positive breast cancer, there was actually a small increase from 2000 to 2018 in NHW women. The incidence rate ratio was statistically significantly higher in NHW and NHB women as compared to API women, but was significantly lower in Hispanic women an AIAN women. However, although AIAN and Hispanic women had a significantly lower risk of having early stage (local stage) breast cancer, they had a significantly higher risk of having distant stage breast cancer than API women in 2000–2018.
Our study on the most recent cohort of breast cancer cases in SEER areas of the United States supported the findings of previous incidence trend studies.8–10,29–35 For example, DeSantis and colleagues9 found that overall breast cancer incidence rates from 2005 to 2014 increased among API (1.7% per year), NHB (0.4% per year), and Hispanic women (0.3% per year) but were stable among NHW and AIAN women in SEER areas. Gomez and colleagues31 showed that breast cancer incidence rates increased over time from 1988 to 2004 among Asian women in California and the incidence increase was greater in the US-born Asian populations than in those foreign-born Asian women. Tuan and colleagues35 reported an increasing trend of breast cancer incidence among Asian women and in most subgroups of Asians such as Filipina, South Asian, Chinese, Korean, and Vietnamese women from 1990 to 2014 in SEER areas, but incidence rates did not change significantly during this time period for NHW and Japanese women. Several other studies also demonstrated an increasing trend in incidence rates for overall breast cancer and for some subtypes of breast cancer in Asian women in the United States.29–35
The decreasing trend in NHW women was primarily attributed to the decreased use of menopausal hormones following the publication and recommendation of two large clinical trial results in 2002, which concluded that hormone replacement therapy was associated with a higher risk of heart disease and breast cancer.3,8–11 It may also be due to small declines in mammography screening since 2000.3,8–11 The increasing trend in other ethnic women, particularly among API women, may be attributed to adaption of western-style diets and lifestyle, more work and life-related stress, lack of physical exercise, increases in body mass index, and declines in the average number of births per woman.4,13–28,37 The improved technology and accuracy in cancer diagnosis and imaging may also have made the previously undetected metastatic tumors or unknown tumor stages to be defined now, hence leading to an increased incidence.
Our study and many previous studies8–11,38 consistently demonstrated that the risk of developing breast cancer was higher in NHW and NHB women, and lower in API, AIAN and Hispanic women. A particular interesting finding was that AIAN and Hispanic women had a lower risk of having early stage breast cancer but had a higher risk of having distant (late) stage breast cancer than in API women. The reasons for these racial/ethnic disparities in the risk of developing breast cancer are multifactorial and might include the lack of physical exercise, higher body mass index, increased work and life related stress, higher alcohol consumption and smoking, delayed marriage and childbirth, lower breast feeding, lower parity, and higher utilization of hormone birth control pills and postmenopausal hormone medications.11,13–28 Although breast cancer incidence rates are increasing in women in all racial/ethnic women except for NHW women, good news is that the mortality rates for breast cancer are decreasing over the past decades due to improvements in early detection and in treatment.11 However, many challenges are still ahead of us in order to address and narrow substantial disparities in cancer incidence and in mortality.
This study has several limitations to be kept in mind for interpretation. First, because there was no information on the place of birth and time of migration for breast cancer cases and for population denominator, the study cannot address the cancer incidence disparities by U.S.-born or foreign-born women or by the timing of migration for those women who immigrated from other countries. Second, although there were some differences among the subgroups of API women such as Chinese, Korean and Japanese Americans, or among the subgroups of Hispanic women such as Mexican or Cuban Americans, the cancer incidence rates by these subgroups cannot be addressed due to lack of information from the population denominators in SEER*Stats data system. Third, many potential risk factors for breast cancer such as parity, smoking, physical exercise, and hormone use differed substantially by race and ethnicity, but breast cancer incidence rates by race/ethnicity duo to these differences cannot be controlled for in the analyses. Fourth, the study found that AIAN and Hispanic women had a significantly higher risk of having distant stage breast cancer than API women in 2000–2018. This may be related to a lower breast cancer mammogram screening rate, as studies showed that in 2018 only 66% of AIAN women had mammogram screening in last two years as compared to 71% of API women aged 50–74 years.40 However, this association cannot be determined in this study due to lack of screening data. Finally, although there was information on health insurance status for cancer cases, this factor cannot be taken into consideration in the analyses because of lack of such information in population denominators.
In conclusion, we observed a slightly increasing trend in overall breast cancer incidence for all ethnic women except for NHW women who had a decreasing trend from 2000 to 2018, but we also observed a small increase in the incidence of hormone receptor positive breast cancer among NHW women and a decreasing trend of hormone receptor negative or unknown breast cancer for all ethnic women. There were still substantial racial disparities in breast cancer incidence with the higher risk of breast cancer in NHW and NHB women and the lower risk in AIAN, Hispanic and API women. AIAN and Hispanic women had a significantly lower risk of having early stage breast cancer but had a significantly higher risk of having distant stage breast cancer than API women. There are still many challenges ahead for us to mitigate risk factors for decreasing breast cancer incidence and to reduce racial disparities for cancer burden.
Supplementary Material
Supp.Materials
