record_id=252 pmid=32212335 doi=10.1002/cncr.32846 pmcid=PMC11995946
TITLE: Forty-year trends in menopausal hormone therapy use and breast cancer incidence  among postmenopausal black and white women

Introduction
After the first reduction in breast cancer incidence in the US in over 20 years resulted in a lower age-adjusted breast cancer incidence in 2003–2004, a finding attributed to decreased menopausal hormone therapy use1,2, it was uncertain what the future course of breast cancer incidence would be. Over a decade later, the low incidence plateau has largely persisted in White women while a new discordance between incidence trends comparing findings in Black and White women has emerged. We review these developments and propose a complementary hypothesis using findings from the WHI randomized trials evaluating hormone therapy as background.
Menopausal Hormone Therapy before the Women’s Health Initiative
Hormone therapy with CEE alone was introduced in clinical practice in 19423 and remains the most effective therapy for menopausal vasomotor symptoms4. Findings from several decades of observational studies suggested benefits with hormone therapy use including lower risk of coronary heart disease and fracture and possibly cognitive impariment5. After hormone therapy was associated with higher breast cancer risk6,7, the concept emerged that hormone-related breast cancers were detected early and had favorable prognosis5. Subsequently, given anticipated favorable risk/benefit balance, hormone therapy became increasingly common and peaked in 1999 with over 35 million US prescriptions8. However, despite a half century as one of the most common medications for postmenopausal women, hormone therapy had never been evaluated in a full scale, randomized clinical trial.
The Women’s Health Initiative Hormone Therapy trials
Against that background, two randomized, full scale clinical trials were initiated in1993 by WHI investigators to provide definitive evidence regarding the risks and benefits of two hormone therapy regimens: CEE plus MPA (for postmenopausal women with an intact uterus) and CEE alone use (for postmenopausal women with prior hysterectomy) on chronic disease risk9,10. The trials evaluated the two hormone therapy preparations most commonly used in US clinical practice. The CEE plus MPA trial was stopped early in 2002 after 5.6 years (median) intervention when overall health risks exceeded benefits with increases in cardiovascular disease and invasive breast cancer11 with the breast cancers diagnosed at more advanced stage12,13. The WHI trial evaluating CEE alone also was stopped early after 7.2 years (median) follow-up based on increased stroke risk and no overall coronary heart disease benefit14. With additional follow-up, breast cancer incidence was found to be significantly reduced by CEE alone13,15.
Complex patterns of hormone therapy influence on breast cancer risk subsequently emerged in the two WHI trials. In the first 2 years of the CEE plus MPA trial, an apparent decrease in breast cancer incidence was ultimately attributed to interference with mammographic detection12,16. Subsequently, year-to-year increases in breast cancer incidence emerged throughout the 5.6 years of intervention, with an associated increase in breast cancer mortality17. In the immediate post-intervention period, there was a substantial drop in breast cancer incidence in the CEE plus MPA group. However, the overall hazard ratio remained above one and a sustained significantly higher breast cancer risk persisted for over a decade after CEE plus MPA use ended with no evidence of risk modulation over time13,18,19. As a result, 5.6 years of CEE plus MPA use resulted in long term increased risk after stopping CEE plus MPA therapy.
In the CEE alone trial, the hazard ratio for breast cancer incidence for CEE alone was lower than 1 throughout the 7.2 year intervention period15,20 which continued through post-intervention follow-up13,19. The significant reduction in breast cancer incidence has been attributed to CEE induced apoptosis21,22 or anti-estrogenic properties unique to CEE23,24. For Black women, the reduction in breast cancer incidence with CEE alone (HR 0.47 95% CI 0.26–0.82) was possibly greater than that seen in White women (interaction P = 0.09)25 with the largest benefit seen in Black women with ≥ 80% African ancestry (trend P = 0.04 for effect modification by ancestry)25,26.
To summarize, in a randomized clinical trial, CEE plus MPA increased breast cancer incidence with increased risk persisting through post-intervention follow-up. In a randomized clinical trial, CEE alone use, for women with prior hysterectomy, decreased breast cancer incidence with decreased risk persisting through post-intervention follow-up.
With long term follow-up of the WHI hormone therapy trials, except for younger postmenopausal women with prior hysterectomy using CEE alone, no overall health benefit emerged for hormone therapy for primary prevention of chronic conditions of postmenopausal women19,27,28. However, the effects of CEE plus MPA and CEE alone on breast cancer incidence and mortality continue to be of public health significance.
Clinical impact of findings from the WHI Hormone Therapy trial
Following presentation of CEE plus MPA trial findings in July, 200211 and a report of adverse effects on breast cancer in June, 200312 there was a rapid and substantial decline in all categories of menopausal hormone therapy use. The decline was particularly steep for combined CEE plus MPA use. Compared to January-June 2002, prescriptions for combined CEE plus MPA use in the US decreased by 66%29. In the same time frame, a substantial decrease in breast cancer incidence was seen in the US in women aged 50 years or older from the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) program. Based on these findings, Ravdin and colleagues1 hypothesized that the breast cancer decrease resulted from the concurrent decrease in CEE plus MPA use.
The relationship between the decrease in CEE plus MPA use and the decrease in breast cancer incidence remained controversial with reduction in mammography a commonly explored alternative30,31. Subsequently, investigators from the WHI CEE plus MPA randomized trial reported, after abrupt interruption of study pills breast cancer incidence sharply declined over the subsequent two years against a background of unchanging mammography18. However, it was uncertain what the longer term effect of the discontinuation of CEE plus MPA on breast cancer incidence would be.
Trends in Breast Cancer Incidence for White and Black Women
The substantial reduction in hormone therapy use following the reports of the WHI trial findings have been sustained. Estimates of hormone therapy use examining several datasets find that the sharp in decrease in hormone use has been sustained through 201632 (Table 1). Based on the Household Component of the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, from 2001 to 2008, total expenditure on hormone therapy decreased from $5.3 billion to $2.3 billion, a 62% reduction33. Results from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) found prevalence of hormone therapy use was 22.4% in 1999 to 4.7% in 201034. Other reports have supported these observations (Table 1)29,35,36, with reductions observed across racial groups, for estrogen, with and without, progestin34,37.
The background of long-term reduction in hormone therapy use and the sharp decline in breast cancer incidence rates seen in women age 50 or greater years between 2002 and 20031,2 has focused attention on the subsequent trajectory of breast cancer incidence and outcome in the US. A number of studies have examined breast cancer trends in this period but most do not focus on postmenopausal women and none considered the potential influence of discordant effects of estrogen alone versus estrogen plus progestin on breast cancer incidence. Based on findings through 2007, DeSantis and colleagues37 identified no further decrease in breast cancer incidence among White women with no comparable reduction seen in Black women over the same period. Toriola and Colditz38, based on finding through 2009, described long term divergence with decreasing breast cancer mortality with increasing breast cancer incidence. In 2016, the convergence of incidence rates between Black and White women was identified for follow-up through 201439,40.
Despite the relatively low and stable age-adjusted breast cancer incidence seen from 2004 to 2015 among White women, a more common impression may be one of a continuing increasing breast cancer incidence based on overall increasing total incidence (not age-adjusted) in the US population. For example, estimated annual breast cancer incidence reported by CA Journal for Clinicians were 211,240 breast cancer cases in US women in 200541, 212,920 cases in 200642, 231,840 cases in 201543, and 266,120 cases in 201844. However, these numbers result from an increase in number and age of US postmenopausal women.
Commentary Objectives
In this commentary we specifically examine the potential role of changes in menopausal hormone therapy with respect to trends in breast cancer incidence over time. The disparate results on breast cancer incidence in the WHI hormone therapy trials evaluating CEE plus MPA and CEE alone are summarized, the sustained nationwide reduction in hormone therapy use is described, a biological rationale for mediating a sustained reduction in breast cancer incidence years after discontinuing CEE plus MPA use in White women is offered along with a rationale for the different trend in breast cancer incidence seen in Black women. While we recognize that a complex series of factors influence breast cancer incidence, we present evidence that the sustained reduction in hormone therapy use could largely be responsible for the sustained reduction in breast cancer incidence seen in White women, and evidence that differences in hormone therapy use among Black women could make some contribution to breast cancer incidence over the same time period.
Current Findings
Based on findings from SEER9, annual age-adjusted breast cancer incidence rates over a 40 year period for US women by age group are depicted in Figure 145. The file updates the findings through 2004 presented by Ravdin and colleagues (grey-shaded area of Figure 1)1. The sharp decline in breast cancer incidence rates for women aged 50 years or older seen in 2003 and 2004 has continued with only a modest increase seen over the ensuing decade with the plateau of breast cancer incidence similar to rates last seen in the early 1990s. In contrast, incidence rates for women less than 50 years old had no perceptible temporal trend.
Annual age-adjusted breast cancer incidence rates over a 40 year period for White and Black women 50 years of age or older are depicted in Figure 2. Here, the blue rectangle spans the 5.6 years WHI CEE plus MPA trial intervention period while the pink rectangle spans the longer 7.2 years WHI CEE alone trial intervention period. The sharp drop in breast cancer in White women followed the sudden reduction in estrogen plus progestin use after publication of findings at the end of the CEE plus MPA intervention. In consideration of the sustained lower breast cancer incidence, by one estimate compared to 2002, through 2012 there have been 126,000 fewer breast cancer cases in the US which otherwise would have occurred had the WHI Hormone Therapy trials not been conducted46. With breast cancer incidence rates continuing to be substantially lower through 2015 than seen in in 2002, likely upwards of 200,000 fewer breast cancer cases have been diagnosed through that date. In consideration of these findings, decision model analyses suggest the WHI CEE plus MPA trial made high-value use of public funds with a substantial return on investment47.
In contrast to findings in White women, an initial decrease in breast cancer incidence in 2003–2004 among Black women, and a corresponding decrease following the CEE-alone trial, were not sustained. Instead, increases in breast cancer incidence subsequently developed (Figure 2). As a result, breast cancer incidence in Black women is now closely comparable to that in White women37, 39. This relative increase in breast cancer incidence, together with the increased proportion of poor prognosis breast cancers in Black women,47, 48 exacerbates the disparity regarding breast cancer adverse outcome in Black women. The lengthier period of declining incidence observed among Blacks (2003–2005; Figure 2) coincides with a delayed decline in hormone use34.
Factors Mediating the Trend in Breast Cancer Incidence for White Women
From 2003–2004 through at least 2016, in US women, use of estrogen plus progestin has remained at a low level32 and mammogram screening frequency has not substantially changed49. While obesity has continued to increase in White women, the frequency of women with obesity was already high and the percentage of obese White women has become only modestly higher in the most recent decade50. Consequently, change in these factors do not provide an explanation for the sustained lower breast cancer incidence seen. While additional factors may be involved, the sustained reduction in hormone therapy use, which began in 2003–200429 can provide a first-order explanation for this finding.
In US White women, the rapid decrease in breast cancers, in parallel with the reduction in estrogen plus progestin use, has been attributed to the sudden change in hormonal environment as a therapeutic intervention for subclinical breast cancers1,18. This hypothesis has support from the clinic. In anecdotal reports, breast cancer regressions after discontinuation of hormonal therapy have been described51, with rapid reduction in breast cancer proliferation seen after stopping hormone therapy52. In the randomized, placebo- controlled, Breast Cancer Prevention Trial, reduced breast cancers were seen in the tamoxifen group within months of study initiation53 while oophorectomy, with sudden reduction in estrogen levels, is an established breast cancer therapy54. The decrease in breast cancer incidence in 2003–2004 was seen predominantly in White women since estrogen plus progestin was commonly used by White women at that time.
With respect to potential mediating mechanisms of estrogen plus progestin influence on breast cancer, CEE plus MPA rapidly and substantially increases breast mammographic density55. In an ancillary nested case-control study within the WHI randomized trial, one-year change in mammographic density after CEE plus MPA predicted all the subsequent increase in breast cancer incidence56.
To understand the sustained, long-term lower breast cancer incidence in White women in the last decade following the decrease in hormone therapy use, the sustained increase in year-to-year breast cancer incidence seen after stopping combined hormone therapy use should be considered13. In preclinical models, progestins have been demonstrated to promote mammary tumors mediated through mitogenic signals stimulating mammary epithelium57. In the same setting, estrogen plus progestin, but not estrogen alone, increases the number of mammary stem and progenitor cells58. Thus, the persistent increase in breast cancer risk following discontinuation of estrogen plus progestin use could results from progestin mediated clonal expansion of breast stem cells resulting in long term increase in breast cancer risk58. The substantial and sustained decrease in estrogen plus progestin use beginning in 2003–2004 then could have resulted in the removal from the population of a large number of White women who would otherwise have experienced a long term increase in breast cancer risk.
Factors Mediating the Trend in Breast Cancer Incidence for Black Women
Several factors contributing to the discordant findings in Black, compared to White women, regarding breast cancer incidence in the 2005–2015 decade. During this period, annual mammography screening has been comparable to that seen in White women59 and rates of obesity have shown substantial increase in Black women rising from 39% of women with obesity in 1999 through 2002 to 58% in 2009 through 201250,60, similar to the proportional increase in obesity seen in White women60. However, as the proportion of women with severe obesity, a factor associated with higher breast cancer risk61 has been greater in Black compared to White women62, this difference could have made some contribution to the increase in breast cancer incidence in Black women over the past decade.
Changes in hormone therapy use may also impact differences in breast cancer incidence in Black and White women. While hormone therapy decreased in both White and Black women33,34,37, the prevalence of estrogen plus progestin use prior to 2002 in Blacks was only a fraction of that reported in Whites63,33,34,37. Also, decreases in Black women may have been dealyed34. In 2001, the percentage of adult women with at least one hormone therapy prescription was 5.4 % of White women and 0.4% of Black women33. Therefore, the reduction in 2008 to 0.1% use in Black women34,37 would have comparatively less influence on breast cancer incidence, and Black women would not have experienced a similar sustained reduction in breast cancer incidence seen in White women. In addition, while discontinuation of hormone therapy was sudden in White women, discontinuation of hormone therapy in Black women took place more slowly over several years34. Consequently, reductions in breast cancer incidence related to discontinuing hormone therapy in black women would be parsed over several years. Finally, hysterectomy is more common in Black women64, 65, as is estrogen alone use. For example, DeSantis37 reported relatively similar estrogen alone use among Black women, ages 50 or older with hysterectomy in 2000, compared to Whites (11.5% v. 18.6%), while estrogen plus progestin prevalence between Black and White women without hysterectomy was more discordant (4.2% v. 13.8%), with less estrogen plus progestin use among Blacks. As CEE alone in the WHI clinical trial was associated with reduction in breast cancer incidence especially in Black women with more African ancestry25,26 and all categories of menopausal hormone therapy use were reduced following WHI reports8,29 a larger fraction of Black women may also have lost a protective benefit of estrogen alone use on breast cancer risk.
Commentary Limitations and Future Directions
The major focus of the current commentary was on the effects of the Women’s Health Initiative hormone therapy trial reports on secular hormone therapy use in postmenopausal women and resulting time-trends changes in total invasive breast cancer incidence. As a result, our commentary did not address the issue of time trends in breast cancer subtypes, perhaps most importantly in estrogen receptor (ER) negative breast cancers. We briefly outline current findings in this area and identify areas for needed ongoing investigation. Based on SEER data findings, divergent ER-specific breast cancer time trends have been seen with steady decrease of nearly 2% per year in ER negative incidence rates seen since 199266 with trends not substantially influenced by the reduction in hormone therapy use66, 67. While it is known that risk factor associations differ by ER subtype68, the basis for the ongoing reduction in ER negative cancer has not been established. As poor prognosis, triple negative (ER -negative, PR negative, HER2 negative) breast cancers are more commonly diagnosed in Black women47,48, time trends in breast cancer subtype have implications for potential changes in the known Black/White disparity regarding breast cancer outcome. While most recent findings identify relatively stable breast cancer risk in White women with increasing breast cancer risk in Black women, modeling incorporating Hispanic and non-Hispanic status, project breast cancer rates slowly increasing for non-Hispanic White women and slowly decreasing for non-Hispanic Black women69. Ongoing vigilance is needed to further define these potentially important relationships.
SUMMARY
In summary, changes in hormone therapy use in postmenopausal women provides a plausible explanation for a substantial component of the sustained lower breast cancer incidence seen in White women since 2003 and contributes to the discordant findings among Black women where, in contrast, increases in breast cancer incidence rates were seen over the 2005–2015 decade.
