record_id=2732 pmid= doi=10.1093/jjco/hyw119
SOURCE: manual-pdf
TITLE: Incidence rate for breast cancer in Japanese in Japan and in the United States from the Cancer Incidence in Five Continents

JJCO
Japanese Journal of
Clinical Oncology
Japanese Journal of Clinical Oncology, 2016, 46(9) 883
doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyw119
Cancer Statistics Digest
Cancer Statistics Digest
Incidence rate for breast cancer in Japanese in Japan
and in the United States from the Cancer Incidence
in Five Continents
In order to make a comparison of breast cancer incidence rates between Japanese in Japan and those in the USA, we abstracted the age-
standardized incidence rates (ASRs) from the Cancer Incidence in Five Continents Vol. I–X (CI5). The International Agency for Research on
Cancer provides the CI5 databases on the incidence of cancer recorded by cancer registries (regional and national) worldwide. We used ASRs
for Japanese from the following cancer registries: Miyagi, Nagasaki and Osaka in Japan, and California-Los Angeles, California-San
Francisco and Hawaii in the USA from the CI5 database. Furthermore, we referred the ASRs in the USA (SEER 9 registries and Hawaii). Year
at cancer diagnosis were from 1959 to 2007 in Vol. I–X in CI5; however, the years were a little different from cancer registries.
Figure 1 shows the ASRs for breast cancers coded as C50 (ICD10) for females. The ASRs in Japan were lower than those in the USA
throughout the observation period. The ASRs of the three prefectures in Japan have been increasing. The ASRs in the USA also showed
increasing trends, but several of them dropped in the latest volume (White in SEER 9 registries and Hawaii, and Japanese in Los Angeles and
Hawaii). In earlier observation periods, Japanese in the USA had lower ASR than White and Black in the USA, but the ASRs of those popula-
tions seem to converge recently.
Note: Data were downloaded from IARC CANCER Mondial Statistical Information System (http://www-dep.iarc.fr/). Responsibility for this presentation and
interpretation lies with the authors of this article.
Kota Katanoda and Megumi Hori
Center for Cancer Registries, Center for Cancer Control and Information Services, National Cancer Center
0
40
80
120
Japan, Miyagi
Japan, Nagasaki
Japan, Osaka
USA, California, Los Angeles:
Japanese
USA, California, San Francisco:
Japanese
USA, Hawaii: Japanese
USA, SEER (9 Registries): White
USA, SEER (9 Registries): Black
USA, Hawaii: White
Figure 1. Age-standardized incidence rate for breast cancer (female).
© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
883
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jjco/article/46/9/883/2218822 by PUSAN NATL UNIV (INACTIVE_ user on 09 August 2026

