record_id=4027 pmid=26661680 doi=10.1002/ijc.29958 pmcid=PMC5283572
TITLE: Cancer incidence among Asian American populations in the United States, 2009-2011

Introduction
Asian Americans are the fastest growing racial/ethnic group in the United
States (US)1. Between 2000 and
2010, the Asian American population grew by 43%, from 10.2 million to 14.7 million,
which was more than four times faster than growth in the total US
population1. This has been
fueled primarily by international immigration from Asia2. In 2010, 74% of Asian American adults were
foreign-born; of those, 36% immigrated in 2000 or later3,4. The most
populous Asian subgroup was Chinese, with 4 million people, followed by Filipino and
Asian Indian with 3.4 million and 3.2 million people, respectively1. The heterogeneous Asian American
population is comprised of distinct subgroups with differences in genetics, culture,
lifestyle, immigration and settlement experiences5. This diversity must be explored to better understand
disparities in cancer incidence among Asian subgroups and to identify protective
attributes as well as risk factors that can shape cancer intervention
strategies.
Most cancer research aggregates Asian Americans into one single group,
potentially blurring important differences among specific Asian subgroups5. Some previous studies using
population-based cancer registry data have revealed clear differences in cancer
incidence among specific Asian subgroups6-15. However, these
studies have a few limitations. Firstly, all reported national rates were based
solely on data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program,
whose catchment area excludes some major metropolitan areas with large Asian
American populations, such as New York, Houston, and Chicago. These areas are only
covered by the National Program of Cancer Registries (NPCR). Secondly, Asian cancer
cases in SEER with missing Asian subgroup category were classified as
not-otherwise-specified (NOS) and routinely excluded from incidence analyses,
leading to underestimated rates by subgroup. Also, without accurately accounting for
these NOS cases, which represented up to 13% of all Asians in 2008-2012 SEER data,
comparisons among the Asian subgroups as well as between these and the other US
racial groups are possibly biased. The final significant limitation of previous
studies is the use of inflated population estimates due to the inclusion of
multiracial Asians in total Asian population. While bridging methods have been
widely used to compute population estimates for specific Asian subgroups6-15, these methods include multiracial Asians in combination with
non-Asian race(s) (e.g., Black), thus giving rise to misclassification in population
estimates and possible mismatches between numerators and denominators.
In this study, we directly address these limitations by (1) including cancer
data from all major states with large Asian populations, (2) imputing NOS cases, and
(3) using population estimates bridged between single Asian race and Asian in
combination with other Asian race(s). Using 2009-2011 data, we estimate cancer
incidence rates for each of the six largest Asian subgroups in the US: Chinese,
Filipino, Japanese, Korean, South Asian, and Vietnamese for 17 most common cancer
sites.
Materials and Methods
Study Data
Cancer incidence data (2015 submission) on the 3-year period from January
1, 2009 through December 31, 2011 were obtained from the eight US states with
the largest population concentration of Asian Americans: California, Florida,
Hawaii, Illinois, New Jersey, New York, Texas, and Washington state, accounted
for 68% of the total Asian American population (10 million out of the 14.7
million total) in the US (Table 1).
All cases of malignant cancers, in addition to in situ
urinary bladder cancers were included. Seventeen most common cancer sites were
classified as follows: oral cavity and pharynx, stomach, colon and rectum, liver
and intrahepatic bile duct, pancreas, lung and bronchus, breast, cervix uteri,
corpus uteri, ovary, prostate, urinary bladder, kidney and renal pelvis,
thyroid, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, leukemia, and all-other-sites combined.
Due to the known high risk for nasopharynx cancer among Asians, we also looked
at this subcategory within oral cavity and pharynx separately8. Female breast cancer was
further stratified using a cutoff age of 50 into premenopausal and
postmenopausal categories because they have different underlying risk factors
which may vary by Asian subgroup. Cancer site was coded according to the
International Classification of Diseases for Oncology, Third Edition
(ICD-O-3).
The North American Association of Central Cancer Registries (NAACCR)
Standards for Cancer Registries code Asian race in 12 different subgroups,
including Asian Indian, Chinese, Filipino, Hmong, Japanese, Kampuchean, Korean,
Laotian, Pakistani, Thai, Vietnamese, and NOS16. Unfortunately, other Asian subgroups, e.g.
Malaysians, Indonesians, etc. are not identified by a race descriptor and are
therefore commonly classified as NOS, lumped together with cases of the 11
racial subgroups described above for whom a specific subgroup is missing. In our
study, these cases for which there is no race descriptor were aggregated into a
single category called Other Specified Asian (OSA).
All Asian cases were included regardless of Hispanic ethnicity. Race 1
and Race 2 (NAACCR items 160 and 161) were used as the Asian race
indicator16. Asians
cases reporting non-Asian race(s) except white were excluded because Asian only
takes precedence over white in multiracial coding17. Asian Indian and Pakistani were aggregated
into one single category, South Asian, according to NAACCR coding protocol.
Although too small to be included in the aims of this study, smaller Hmong,
Kampuchean, Laotian, and Thai populations were aggregated into one Southeast
Asian category in order to account for them in the NOS pool. US non-Hispanic
whites were used as the referent group.
NOS cases were reassigned by imputation models stratified by age, sex,
cancer site, and geographic region. We identified 12 geographic regions, one for
each state except California, which was divided into five regions due to its
large Asian American population and an uneven distribution of specific Asian
subgroups (Table 1). We considered the
boundary of the local cancer registries, the proportions of different Asian
subgroups and geographical adjacency to derive these 5 California regions: Los
Angeles County, Bay Area Region (including Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, San
Francisco and San Mateo Counties), Santa Clara Region (including Monterey, San
Benito, Santa Clara and Santa Cruz Counties), Greater California without Orange
County, and Orange County. The latter was carved out from Greater California due
to a substantially higher proportion of Vietnamese than other California
regions.
To take into account the NOS cases in our incident counts we proceeded
as follows. Birthplace was used to enhance the identification of the 11
specified Asian subgroups as well as identify OSA (e.g., a NOS case with a
birthplace of China was recoded as Chinese; a NOS case with a birthplace of
Malaysia was recoded as OSA). In order to estimate the quantity of OSAs that
could not be identified by birthplace but would have been identified by a race
specific descriptor had it existed in the NAACCR standards, we used an average
ratio between those with a specific race without a matching birthplace and those
of the same race but with a matching birthplace (e.g. Filipino race, birthplace
Philippines) among Filipinos, Koreans, Southeast Asians, and Vietnamese. The
choice of these four subgroups was based on the similar history of more recent
immigration to the US to those of OSAs, such as Indonesia and Malaysia. The
remaining NOS cases were reassigned by stratified imputation models as performed
in previous research on cancer risk18.
Variables are defined as follows: age group j=1-5 for
ages 0-19, 20-44, 45-59, 60-74, ≥75; cancer site l=1-17
for oral cavity and pharynx, stomach,…, other-site combined; geographic
region m=1-12 for Los Angeles County, …, Florida; Asian
subgroup i=1 for South Asian, 2 for Chinese, 3 for Japanese, 4
for Filipino, 5 for Korean, 6 for Vietnamese, 7 for Southeast Asian, 8 for OSA,
and 9 for NOS. D is the number of cases whose race matches
birthplace, and d is the number of cases whose race does not
match birthplace.
For each age group j, cancer site l,
and geographic region m, we defined the total
(N) of a specific Asian subgroup i as:
Nijlm=Dijlm+dijlm Hence, the average ratio (AR) was:
ARjlm=(∑i=47dijlm∕Dijlm)∕4 The estimate for OSAs that cannot be identified by birthplace
and the total number of OSAs was given by: d8jlm=D8jlmARjlm
N8jlm=D8jlm+d8jlm We then defined the proportion (P) of each
Asian subgroup i over total Asians as: Pijlm=Nijlm∕(∑i=17Nijlm+N8jlm) Given the uneven distribution of NOS cases by age, 18 age groups
(k=1-18 for ages 0-4, 5-9, …, 80-84, ≥85)
were used for proportionate partition. The average ratios and proportions based
on j were used for k when the corresponding
age groups indexed by k overlap with those groups indexed by
j (e.g., j=1 when k=1-4).
Hence, adjusted total (N*) of NOS cases was given
by: N∗9klm=N9klm−D8klmARjlm Adjusted total of NOS cases were proportionately partitioned to
each Asian subgroup as follows: N∗iklm=Niklm+N∗9klmPijlm Population data were derived from 2010 US Census. Since Asians
that report several Asian subgroups are counted several times in census counts,
the sum of all specific Asian subgroups exceeds the total Asian
population1. To adjust
this, we applied sex and age-specific proportions of multiple-Asian-race counts
for each subgroup to the net difference between the real total and
single-Asian-race counts to derive subgroup estimates.
Average annual cancer incidence rates per 100,000 persons were
calculated with and without stratified imputation for comparison, and
age-standardized to the 2000 US Standard Population. Corresponding 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated with gamma intervals
modification19. R 3.13
and SAS 9.3 were used for data analysis.
This study was approved by the University of Nevada, Las Vegas
Institutional Review Board (IRB), the Illinois Department of Public Health IRB,
and the Washington State IRB. Data use agreements were obtained from the SEER
program, the New York Cancer Registry, the Texas Cancer Registry, the Illinois
State Cancer Registry, the Washington State Cancer Registry, and the Florida
Cancer Data System.
Results
A total of 90,709 Asian and 1,327,727 non-Hispanic white new cancer cases
were diagnosed from 2009 to 2011 in the eight states in our study (Table 2). California accounted for 52% of all
the Asian cases, followed by New York with 10%. Of Asian cancer cases, 15% were NOS
(12% in SEER and 23% in NPCR). Due to the uneven distribution of NOS cases, the
increase in overall incidence rates after stratified imputation varied considerably
by Asian subgroup with the lowest increment of 8% observed in Japanese men and the
highest of 25% in South Asian women (Table 3
and 4; Supporting Information Table
1 and 2). Within
each Asian subgroup, the increment also differed substantially by cancer site. The
overall cancer incidence rate for Asian American men was 336.5/100,000 person-years;
for women it was 299.6/100,000. This was nearly 38% and 33% lower than non-Hispanic
white men and women, respectively. For the majority of cancer sites, incidence rates
were lower among all Asian American populations than non-Hispanic whites. However,
compared to non-Hispanic whites, Asian Americans had significantly higher rates for
three infection-related cancers – nasopharyngeal, liver, and stomach
cancers.
Among the Asian subgroups, Filipinos ranked highest in overall cancer
incidence for men and second for women, partially due to high prostate and breast
cancer rates. They also had the highest thyroid cancer rates (9.7/100,000 in men and
28.5/100,000 in women). Also with high prostate and breast cancer rates, Japanese
ranked second in men and first in women for overall cancer incidence. Additionally,
colorectal cancer rates were highest in this group (59.5/100,000 in men and
40.5/100,000 in women). The lowest overall cancer incidence rates were found in
South Asian men and Korean women, while Chinese men and women had the second lowest
overall rates. Remarkably, the Chinese subgroup had the highest nasopharyngeal
cancer rates (8.0/100,000 in men and 2.5/100,000 in women) and the Koreans had the
highest stomach cancer rates (37.8/100,000 in men and 18.8/100,000 in women),
significantly higher than any other Asian populations. Unlike other subgroups, South
Asians had low nasopharyngeal, stomach, and liver cancer rates, similar to those of
non-Hispanic whites. Notably, they also showed markedly low colorectal (28.1/100,000
in men and 22.3/100,000 in women) and lung cancer rates (27.1/100,000 in men and
14.9/100,000 in women). The Vietnamese subgroup had the highest liver cancer rates
(52.8/100,000 in men and 15.5/100,000 in women) as well as the highest cervical
cancer rate (9.0/100,000) among Asian subgroups.
Discussion
Our study found that Asian Americans have lower overall cancer incidence
rates than non-Hispanic whites, especially for the four most common cancers:
prostate, breast, colorectal, and lung. However, in comparison to non-Hispanic
whites, Asian Americans are disproportionately affected by infection-related
cancers, such as nasopharynx, liver and stomach cancers, but notably not cervical
cancer. These findings are consistent with previous research7-9, although our updated data and new methodology reveal some new
cancer patterns among specific Asian subgroups.
The three highest cancer rates in Asian Americans are prostate, lung and
colorectal in men, and breast, colorectal and lung in women. There is considerable
variation across Asian subgroups but overall risk for these four cancers is lower
than in non-Hispanic whites.
Specific cancer differences
Prostate cancer rates were highest among Filipino and Japanese men, but
still 19% and 31% lower than rates of non-Hispanic whites. Vietnamese and Korean
subgroups showed the lowest risk of prostate cancer among all Asians. Few risk
factors are known for prostate cancer except for age and African ancestry. Asian
populations traditionally show low risk for this cancer7-9 but in Western countries like the US incidence is mostly
driven by the extent of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) screening
coverage20, which is
currently not recommended on a population basis. In clear relation with their
incidence rates, it is not surprising that Filipino and Japanese men have been
found to have the highest PSA screening rates (48% and 50%, respectively) while
Vietnamese and Korean men have the lowest (13% and 22%) among all Asian
subgroups in the California Health Interview Survey21. In the literature, the high incidence of
prostate cancer for Filipinos among Asian subgroups has been related to their
lower consumption of non-fermented soy products22. These products are popular in traditional
Asian diets and have been associated with a 25%-30% reduced risk for prostate
cancer23,24.
Breast cancer was the leading cancer among women for all Asian
subgroups, with Japanese women having a risk comparable to that of non-Hispanic
white women, mostly attributable to a significantly higher rate among
premenopausal Japanese women. Unlike other Asian subgroups, two-thirds of the
Japanese American population is US-born3. Previous studies have shown that the cancer rates in
US-born Asians approach that of non-Hispanic whites in successive generations
and that US-born Asians have distinct profiles from their foreign-born
counterparts13-15. The excess breast cancer
burden in Japanese Americans may also be partially attributed to higher
mammogram usage, older age at first childbirth, and lower number of childbirths
compared to other Asian subgroups21, which are prevalent risk factors for breast cancer in
Western populations25,26. Premenopausal breast cancer
has unique protective factors such as weight status and breastfeeding. Further
research is needed to explain the higher breast cancer risk in premenopausal
Japanese women.
Colorectal cancer rates were relatively high only among the Japanese
subgroup, 25% and 11% higher than those of non-Hispanic white men and women.
This group also has been found to have the highest colorectal cancer screening
rate (83%) among Asian subgroups21. Because screening is known to reduce colorectal cancer
incidence, our findings suggest that environmental factors are strong drivers of
the colorectal cancer risk in this group. As the only subgroup that is majority
US-born3, the Japanese
are more likely to have adopted a Western lifestyle, including dietary habits
and consequent obesity, which is associated with increased risk for colorectal
cancer21,27. Similarly, in Japan, an
increase in dietary intake of milk, meat, eggs, and fat from 1950 to 1970 has
been met with a concomitant sharp rise in colorectal cancer since the early
1990s28. In most Asian
countries, rapid economic growth resulted in a shift from traditional dietary
patterns to an increased intake of fat, sugar and animal-source foods which
leads to greater risk of colorectal cancer. Lung cancer rates were highest among
the Vietnamese subgroup, but still 11% and 47% lower than those of non-Hispanic
white men and women, respectively. Lung cancer rates are predominantly a
reflection of past smoking trends, and smoking prevalence is relatively low
among Asian Americans, particularly women. According to the California Health
Interview Survey21, Vietnamese
in California currently have the highest smoking rates among all Asian subgroups
while South Asians have the lowest. This coincides with our findings of higher
rates for Vietnamese and remarkably low lung cancer incidence among South
Asians.
Stomach cancer rates were high among Koreans, Chinese, Japanese, and
Vietnamese. Koreans had the highest rates, nearly five times higher than
non-Hispanic whites. The high risk for Koreans compared to other countries in
Asia is confirmed by global incidence rates provided by GLOBOCAN29. The primary identified cause
of non-cardia stomach cancer is infection with Helicobacter
pylori. Interestingly, stomach cancer rates in South Asian and
Filipino subpopulations were similar to non-Hispanic whites despite a high
prevalence of adult H. pylori infection in their countries of
origin30,31. The extremely high
vulnerability observed in Korean and other Asian subgroups could be related to a
high dietary salt intake, which may enhance H. pylori
colonization, alter gastric mucus viscosity, or damage gastric epithelium, all
of which facilitate the development of stomach cancer32,33.
Liver cancer rates were higher than those of non-Hispanic whites in all
Asian subgroups except South Asian men. The highest rates, almost five times
higher, were observed in the Vietnamese subpopulation. Infection with hepatitis
B virus (HBV) is the major cause of liver cancer in Asia and developing
countries, while in the US, hepatitis C virus (HCV) is the more common viral
cause. Nonetheless, the Vietnamese American population has a high prevalence,
14%, of chronic HBV infection34, which may partially be attributed to the absence of
newborn hepatitis B vaccination in Vietnam until 201235. Moreover, the 6% prevalence of HCV infection
in Vietnam is high compared to the average prevalence of 2% for most other Asian
countries34. These
trends may account for the observed high rates among Vietnamese in our study. In
general, populations in Asia have a higher risk of liver cancer because they
tend to acquire HBV and HCV infection at a young age34. South Asians in our study have relatively low
liver cancer incidence, which may be attributed to a lower prevalence of both
HBV (3%) and HCV (1%-1.5%) infections in South Asia compared to other countries
in East and Southeast Asia36,37. Notably, the predominant mode
of transmission of HBV and HCV in India is blood transfusion and the use of
unsafe therapeutic injection rather than the usual vertical transmission at the
time of birth, most common in Asia38,39. There are
several other risk factors associated with liver cancer, such as alcohol use,
smoking, and obesity. However, given the lower prevalence of binge drinking,
smoking, and obesity among Asian Americans21, viral infection is the most likely cause for the heavy
burden of liver cancer in specific Asian subgroups. Since liver cancer has a
poor prognosis, more action to screen for and prevent the progression of
hepatitis B and C among certain Asian subgroups, especially the Vietnamese, is
warranted.
Nasopharyngeal cancer rates were strikingly high among Chinese,
Vietnamese, and Filipino subgroups. The highest rates, observed in Chinese, were
more than 13 times higher than those of non-Hispanic whites. Infection with
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is associated with
undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma40. Previous research indicates that the unusual high risk
for nasopharyngeal cancer in certain Asian subgroups may be attributed to
genetic predisposition and environmental factors that alter the oncogenic
properties of EBV as well as increase susceptibility to environmental
carcinogens41,42. When adjusted to the World
Standard, the rates in our study for the Chinese subgroup (6.8/100,000 in men
and 2.2/100,000 in women) were actually higher than those reported by GLOBOCAN
for China (2.7/100,000 in men and 1.1/100,000 in women)29. The first generation of
Chinese Americans came mainly from China’s Guangdong Province where
nasopharyngeal carcinoma rates are much higher than in other provinces43. Moreover, nasopharyngeal
cancer is known to occur with obvious familial aggregation43. These patterns may contribute
to our observed elevated rates. In any case, further studies on nasopharyngeal
carcinoma in Asian subgroups should be conducted to clarify this increased
risk.
Cervical cancer rates were high in the Vietnamese subgroup only. This
finding is baffling given prior studies showing Vietnamese women with the
highest cervical screening test (Pap) usage (76% in 2007) among all Asian
subgroups21. Low
English proficiency, low educational attachment, and high poverty rates among
Vietnamese women may adversely impact their receipt of assistance with cervical
cancer control21,44. We could not find any
literature on the prevalence of HPV infection and its oncotypes among the
Vietnamese subgroup.
Thyroid cancer rates were relatively high among Filipinos compared to
other Asian subgroups and non-Hispanic whites, although the reasons are unclear.
Risk factors include a history of goiter or thyroid nodules and lower soy
isoflavone consumption45. Due
to early clinical detection and diagnosis, multiple countries including the US
have experienced a substantial increase in thyroid cancer incidence without a
concomitant increase in mortality46,47. While
Filipinos have a higher healthcare access rate and lower poverty rate than other
Asian subgroups21, it is
unlikely that increased detection alone would explain this higher risk for
thyroid cancer.
The role of acculturation in explaining some of the variability in our
observed results cannot be directly measured. However, it is worth noting that
the Japanese, who have the longest history in the US, seem to have intermediate
rates between those of other Asian subgroups and non-Hispanic whites for
prostate, breast, and uterine cancer. Their colorectal cancer rates actually
surpass those of non-Hispanic whites in our study. These cancers are often
associated with a Western lifestyle. Yet the rates for liver and stomach cancer
for the Japanese subgroup remain higher than those of non-Hispanic whites. This
suggests that the process of cancer risk conversion from culture of origin to
the dominant culture is complex and spans more than one generation. To a lesser
extent, the Filipino subgroup also shows a pattern consistent conversion in
cancer risk due to acculturation. South Asians seem to be the most distinct of
all subgroups and show overall the lowest risk for cancer among men, with
remarkably low rates of lung and colorectal cancers. Aside from a low smoking
rate and dominant vegetarian diet21,48, the causes
of this apparent lack of vulnerability, especially for colorectal cancer, are
worth further study.
Overall, these results complement previously published
research7-9. In the most recent publication
on this subject, Gomez et al. reported incidence rates by Asian subgroup for
five of the most common cancer sites for the period 2004-20087. Our rates for 2009-2011 are not
dissimilar after taking into account the decreasing trends for cancer incidence
in Asian men and the stable trends in Asian women reported in the most recent
Annual Report on Cancer49.
A significant strength of this study is that it provides rates for the
largest coverage to date of Asian Americans, more than two thirds of the overall
total national Asian population, by using cancer registry data from both SEER
and NPCR. Out of the total US Asian population of 14.7 million, 73% of Chinese,
79% of Filipino, 78% of Japanese, 65% of Korean, 63% of South Asian, and 65% of
Vietnamese American populations were covered. The inclusion of the NPCR data in
our study increased the coverage of all Asian subgroups, especially South
Asians, whose coverage was doubled. An additional strength is our application of
an equitable and unbiased method to impute Asian NOS cases, which accounted for
15% of Asian cancer cases. We address the specificities of NAACCR data
collection on Asians with new methodology building on previous work by Pinheiro
et al.18. By accounting for
NOS cases, the overall rates are approximately 5%-6% higher than those based on
the current race descriptors and algorithm. However, the increment varies
considerably by cancer site, and is as high as 9% for cancers with better
prognosis, such as thyroid, breast, and prostate cancers. In summary, this study
is the first to provide incidence rates that are directly comparable among
specific Asian subgroups as well as between them and other US reference
populations.
NAACCR designed the NAACCR Asian/Pacific Islander Identification
Algorithm (NAPIIA) to reduce Asian NOS cases17. NAPIIA uses name and birthplace to enhance the race
identification among Asian NOS cases indirectly. However, its use in this study
would have introduced bias in the allocation of Asian NOS cases because the
coverage of the name and surname portion of the algorithm is not uniform across
major specified Asian subgroups and is absent among OSA subgroups. In practice,
its use in this study would have substantially overestimated Chinese cancer
rates and underestimated South Asian rates (data not shown).
Several limitations may have affected our results. The estimates assume
that NOS cases occur randomly across all Asian subgroups who share the same sex,
cancer site, age group, and geographic region. While this is the most logical
assumption, it is possible that the reality may be somewhat different. The
precision of our confidence intervals may be overestimated because our
imputation model does not account for the uncertainty of the observed NOS
counts. Another possible limitation is that race/ethnicity data from cancer
registries are derived from medical records and administrative information while
data from the Census are based on self-identifications alone. The two may not be
totally comparable. Also, birthplace was used to improve identification of
specified Asians and estimate OSAs, but the availability of birthplace data may
not be uniform across Asian subgroups. Finally, due to limited access to Race 2
data, estimates in Florida were strictly based on Race 1. However, given the
comparatively low number of Asian cases in Florida, it is unlikely that this
affected our results.
This study portrays unique cancer incidence patterns among specific
Asian subgroups and provides a reliable baseline for future cancer surveillance
research and health policy. Complex phenomena like acculturation and cancer risk
conversion may help explain why rates for certain cancers remain higher than
average among Asian Americans while cancer risk for the leading four cancers
appears to be converging with US averages15,50. Nonetheless,
these analyses on the heterogeneity of cancer profiles among Asian subgroups can
provide unique opportunities to better understand the epidemiology of these
cancers as well as facilitate future research hypotheses. The variations
observed require future research to explore cancer susceptibility among Asian
American subgroups. In addition, this study highlights the critical importance
of public health efforts that target cancer disparities among Asian subgroups
through improved surveillance and prevention efforts, including screening and
community-based education.
Supplementary Material
Cancer_Incidence_Supporting_Info
