record_id=54 pmid=33099777 doi=10.1002/ijc.33331 pmcid=PMC8544783
TITLE: Breast cancer among Asian Indian and Pakistani Americans: A surveillance, epidemiology and end results-based study

Introduction
South Asians are the fastest growing major ethnic group in the United States, increasing by 40% between 2010 and 20171. Of around 5.4 million South Asians in the United States, 92% are of Asian Indian or Pakistani origin1. Many Asian Indian and Pakistani Americans (AIPA) are employed in medical and technology fields, giving them a model minority stereotype. However, 13% to 22% of AIPA live under 125% of poverty line and lack health coverage2. More than 80% of AIPA live in male-led households2, and 40% live in multigenerational households3. Only 34% to 54% of AIPA women are in the workforce, of which 37% to 53% earn less than $12,500 annually2. Women constitute 59% of AIPA adults without a high school diploma, but only 35% of adults with graduate degrees2. Given this diverse cultural background of AIPA, it is becoming increasingly critical to study the health of this rapidly growing population.
The AIPA population is at increased risk for cancer and other preventable diseases due to the effect of migration on lifestyle and socio-cultural determinants of health4. The incidence of breast cancer, which is amenable to screening and early detection, is increasing among AIPA women5. Few studies have examined the characteristics of breast tumors in AIPA6,7. In these prior studies, AIPA women were younger when diagnosed and had more aggressive clinical-pathologic features such as higher stage, higher grade and more estrogen receptor negative (ER-) tumors than non-Hispanic White (NHW) cases. In analyses of a few discrete time points adjusted for tumor characteristics6 and in unadjusted analyses7, these studies noted better, albeit non-significant, survival in AIPA than NHW cases. AIPA had significantly better survival than NHW cases in a study of early stage breast cancers8.
Yet, for a fast-growing minority, surprisingly little is known about breast cancer in this socio-culturally unique population. There is a dearth of nuanced assessment and interpretations of breast cancer incidence rates, correlates of breast cancer outcomes, and follow-up patterns in AIPA, who are an understudied racial/ethnic minority in the United States for disproportionate burden of cancer9. These observations suggest a critical need for comprehensive investigations of age-specific breast cancer incidence, follow-up patterns, and death due to breast cancer in the presence of other competing causes of death in AIPA women, and use the insights gained from this investigation to plan effective disease control strategies for this population. Therefore, we pursued these investigations using data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) program (https://seer.cancer.gov). As a benchmark for comparison, we also examined age-specific breast cancer incidence and death due to breast cancer and due to other causes in NHW women.
The contributions of our study include a segmented Poisson regression analysis to understand the rate of age-specific breast cancer incidence in AIPA and NHW women, and a proportional hazards regression analysis to understand death due to breast cancer in AIPA and NHW cases by accounting for death due to other causes as competing events. Our results provide insights into breast cancer burden for AIPA women, and suggest several hypotheses to guide future studies to better understand factors influencing breast cancer etiology and prognosis in this population, with the ultimate goal of developing culturally-relevant strategies to increase their utilization of preventive health care.
Materials and Methods
Data for age-specific incidence
We abstracted age-specific breast cancer incidence rates for AIPA and NHW women from the database of SEER 9 registries plus New Jersey, San Jose-Monterey and Los Angeles registries10, which includes diagnosis between 1990 and 2014. This database provides the total number of breast cancer cases and the size of the at-risk population, based on the US Census, in 5-year age groups for NHW and AIPA populations.
Data for breast cancer survival
We examined the SEER 9 and SEER 18 databases to identify a dataset for survival analysis. The SEER 9 database11 includes cases diagnosed between 1975 and 2016 from 9 registries (Supplementary Table S1). The SEER 18 database12 includes cases diagnosed between 2000 and 2016 from the SEER 9 registries and 9 additional registries, of which one – the Alaska Native Tumor Registry – does not include any South Asians. From each database, we obtained a case listing of age at diagnosis of breast cancer, year of diagnosis, tumor grade, ER status, progesterone receptor (PR) status, HER2 status, tumor subtype, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, type of surgery, cause of death and survival time for AIPA and NHW cases.
We obtained tumor stage using the variables “SEER Historic Stage A”, “SEER Summary Stage 1977”, “SEER Summary Stage 2000” and “SEER Combined Summary Stage 2000” for cases diagnosed from 1975 to1994, 1995 to 2000, 2001 to 2003, and 2004 to 2016, respectively, and categorized stage as localized, regional and distant. SEER categorizes chemotherapy as “yes” or “no/unknown”. Patients with “no/unknown” chemotherapy were deemed to have not received any chemotherapy. Cases with beam radiation, combination of beam with implants or isotopes, radiation with unspecified method, radioactive implants (including brachy therapy), and radioisotopes were deemed to have received radiation treatment. All others were deemed to have not received radiation. We used the variable “RX Summ—Surg Prim Site (1998)+” to categorize surgery as partial mastectomy / lumpectomy, radical mastectomy, subcutaneous or total mastectomy, no surgery and unknown.
Patients were categorized as alive, died of breast cancer, and died of other causes based on “cause of death to site recode variable”. Survival time was measured as the number of months elapsed between the date of diagnosis and the date of death or, for alive cases, the date of last follow-up. The study end date was December 31, 2016.
Statistical Analysis
Poisson regression model for age-specific breast cancer incidence rate:
For each race/ethnicity E (= AIPA or NHW), denote YAE as the number of breast cancer cases and NAE as the size of the at-risk population at age A (or in an age group with mid-point A). These data are available from the SEER age-specific cancer incidence database. First, we examined the age distribution of the at-risk population of AIPA and NHW women by plotting NAE versus A, and calculated the average and standard deviation of the ages. Next, we fitted a Poisson model for YAE, with the mean or expected value of the number of breast cancer cases as E{YAE} = NAE × R(A,E), where R(A,E) is breast cancer incidence rate at age A for race/ethnicity E13. Prior studies of carcinogenesis demonstrated a log-linear relationship between age and cancer rate i.e., a linear relationship between the natural logarithm of age and the natural logarithm of cancer rate14,15. Studies in NHW breast cancer cases found distinct log-linear relationships before and after a breakpoint age15. Therefore, we modeled the rate as a log-linear function of A, given by13:
log{R(A,E)}=αE+βE×log(A)+θE×[log(A)−log(BE)]×I[log(A)>log(BE)],
where, for race/ethnicity E, αE is the intercept term, βE is the slope of the log-linear relationship between age and breast cancer incidence rate, BE is an unknown breakpoint age, θE is difference in the slope before and after the breakpoint age, and the notation I[C] is indicator function taking value 1 if the condition C in the square parentheses is true and taking value 0 otherwise. We fitted this model using data for women of age 30 years and above due to the low rate of breast cancer before age 30 years. We estimated the breakpoint age, intercept, slopes, their standard errors, and conducted hypothesis tests using previously described methods in the literature13,16,17. Briefly, for each race/ethnicity E, we estimated the breakpoint age BE and obtained maximum likelihood estimates of the intercept and the slopes using an iterative approach, and obtained the standard errors using the delta method16,17. We tested the null hypothesis that βE = 0 against a two-sided alternative using a Wald statistic. When θE = 0, it means that there is no breakpoint age BE. Since the parameter θE only appears in the model when BE exists, we tested the null hypothesis θE = 0 against a two-sided alternative using a score statistic in the presence of a nuisance parameter16 (see Supplementary Material).
Survival Analysis:
We examined the sample sizes, number of deaths due to breast cancer and median follow-up times of AIPA and NHW cases in the SEER 9 and SEER 18 datasets and selected one dataset for survival analysis. In the selected dataset, we calculated descriptive statistics for age at diagnosis, stage, grade, ER, PR, HER2, tumor subtype, chemotherapy, radiation therapy and surgery separately for AIPA and NHW cases. For survival analysis, we categorized age at diagnosis as “< 40 years”, “40–49 years” and “≥ 50 years”, and created binary variables for stage (localized versus regional or distant) and grade (I and II versus III and IV). We also categorized year of diagnosis as “2000 to 2004”, “2005 to 2009” and “2010 to 2016”. Cases with unknown stage, grade, surgery, and borderline or unknown ER and PR statuses were removed from survival analyses. Since HER2 and tumor subtype information were not available for cases diagnosed before 2010, these characteristics were not included in survival analyses.
We calculated median follow-up times separately for AIPA and NHW cases as the median of the follow-up time of cases without any event. We estimated the cumulative probability of death due to breast cancer by accounting for death due to other causes as competing risk factors18–22 and compared the cumulative probability of death due to breast cancer between AIPA and NHW women21,22. We examined whether the cumulative probability of death due to breast cancer differed significantly between AIPA and NHW cases in distinct categories of age, stage, grade, ER and PR status, and examined whether this difference varied across the categories by evaluating the interaction between race/ethnicity and each variable22.
We estimated the hazard ratio of death due to breast cancer in AIPA (versus NHW) cases, adjusting for year of diagnosis, age, stage, grade, ER status, PR status, chemotherapy, radiation therapy and surgery, using two multivariable proportional hazards regression models22,23. In the first model, we used a sub-distribution hazard function, which allows us to estimate the effect of race/ethnicity on the cumulative incidence of death due to breast cancer over time, and offers insights into prognosis23. Under this approach, the risk set at a given time includes all women who have not died of breast cancer by that time. In the second model, we used a cause-specific hazard function, which allows us to estimate the effect of race/ethnicity on the rate of death due to breast cancer. Under this approach, which offers insights into associations23, the risk set at a given time includes those subjects who are currently alive (i.e., have not died of breast cancer or have not died of other causes by that time). Finally, to understand whether the effect of race/ethnicity on death due to breast cancer may be explained via its effect on death due to other causes, we also estimated the adjusted hazard ratio of death due to other causes in AIPA (versus NHW) cases using the two hazard functions21,22,23.
In all our hypothesis tests, comparisons with two-tailed p-values smaller than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Statistical software
All data analyses were conducted using the SEER*Stat software version 8.3.624, SAS version 9.425, and the R programming language version 3.6.026 with libraries segmented17, cmprsk27, and fastcmprsk28.
Results
Age-specific breast cancer incidence rate
In the SEER cancer incidence database, the population of AIPA women were significantly younger than the population of NHW women (average age (standard deviation): 31.1 (19.3) years for AIPA, and 40.3 (23.3) years for NHW, p < 0.0001, Supplementary Figure 1).
AIPA women had lower age-specific incidence of breast cancer than NHW women (Figure 1). The estimated breakpoint ages from segmented Poisson regression models were 46 years (standard error (se) = 1.02 years) and 46.4 years (se = 0.16 years) for AIPA and NHW women, respectively. Breast cancer rate increased significantly with slopes of 2.2 (se = 0.11, p < 0.0001) and 2.3 (se = 0.02, p < 0.0001) in AIPA and NHW women, respectively, before the breakpoint age. Breast cancer incidence continued to increase significantly, albeit at a slower rate, with slopes of 0.83 (se = 0.06, p < 0.0001) and 1.22 (se = 0.005, p < 0.0001) in AIPA and NHW women, respectively, after the breakpoint age (see also Table 1).
Choice of SEER database for survival analysis
Since SEER 9 and SEER 18 databases had considerably more NHW than AIPA cases (Supplementary Table S1), our choice of a database for survival analysis was based on the characteristics of SA cases. The SEER 9 database had 2,076 AIPA cases, of which 1,753 (84%) were diagnosed between 2000 and 2016. The SEER 18 database had 5,704 AIPA cases diagnosed between 2000 and 2016, of which 3,710 were from New Jersey and 3 registries in California that are not part of SEER 9. The total number of AIPA events in the SEER 9 and SEER 18 databases were 223 and 502, respectively, and the median follow-up times were 57 months and 54 months, respectively. Thus, the SEER 18 database had 275% more AIPA cases, 225% more events, and only 3 fewer months of follow-up than the SEER 9 database. Therefore, we selected the SEER 18 database for survival analysis.
Patient Characteristics
Complete data were available for 4,900 AIPA and 482,250 NHW cases. The remaining 804 AIPA cases and 88,667 NHW cases had missing data for at least one of the following variables: stage, grade, ER, PR, surgery. Cases with missing data were more likely to have distant stage and grade IV disease, negative PR status, and not receive chemotherapy, radiation therapy or surgery (Supplementary Table S2).
A total of 115 (2.3%) AIPA cases were diagnosed in 2000, and the annual number of new cases increased progressively to 497 (10%) in 2016, while the annual number new NHW diagnosis was fairly uniformly distributed with around 28,500 (6%) new cases each year (Supplementary Figure S3). The median follow-up times based on AIPA and NHW cases having complete data were 52 and 77 months, respectively. A total of 376 (8%) AIPA and 47,981 (10%) NHW cases died of breast cancer, while 195 (4%) AIPA and 62,853 (13%) NHW cases died of other causes. The most common other causes of death were heart diseases (53 AIPA and 21,176 NHW cases), cerebrovascular disease (15 AIPA and 5,380 NHW cases), lung cancer (12 AIPA and 4,796 NHW cases), other malignancies (21 AIPA and 3,217 NHW cases), and diabetes mellitus (9 AIPA and 1,947 SA cases).
Survival Analysis
The estimated 5-year cumulative probability of death due to breast cancer, our main outcome of interest, for the entire study sample was 8.2% (standard error = 0.0004) (Figure 3). The characteristics of significantly high cumulative probability of death due to breast cancer were (Supplementary Figure S4): age at diagnosis before 40 years (p < 0.0001), regional or distant stage (p < 0.0001), grade III or IV (p < 0.0001), ER- (p < 0.0001) and PR- (p < 0.0001) tumors. There was no statistically significant interaction between race/ethnicity and tumor characteristics (Supplementary Table S3).
In multivariable analysis based on the sub-distribution hazard function, adjusted for year of diagnosis, age, stage, grade, ER status, PR status, chemotherapy, radiation therapy and surgery, AIPA cases had significantly lower incidence of death due to breast cancer (hazard ratio = 0.79, 95% CI = 0.72 – 0.86, p < 0.0001) and lower incidence of death due to other causes (hazard ratio = 0.55, 95% CI = 0.47 – 0.64, p < 0.0001) than NHW cases. Similarly, AIPA also had significantly lower cause-specific hazard of death due to breast cancer (hazard ratio = 0.76, 95% CI = 0.69 – 0.84, p < 0.0001) and lower cause-specific hazard or death due to other causes (hazard ratio = 0.43, 95% CI = 0.46 – 0.61, p < 0.0001) than NHW cases. These results are summarized in Table 3.
Discussion
Asian Indian and Pakistani Americans are a fast-growing ethnic minority in the United States and face an increasing burden of breast cancer. Yet, the characteristics of breast cancer incidence and outcome in this population remain under studied. Our analyses attempt to address this issue by examining age-specific incidence rates, tumor characteristics and breast cancer-specific mortality in Asian Indian and Pakistani women living in the United States.
In our analyses, breast cancer incidence rate was lower in AIPA than NHW women. If, at any age, the rate of carcinogenesis process leading to cancer incidence is equivalent to the rate of breast tissue ageing15, the lower rate of increase of breast cancer incidence in AIPA than NHW cases after the breakpoint age suggests slower breast tissue aging in AIPA than NHW women after age 46 years. This might imply that AIPA and NHW women have different postmenopausal estrogen levels. Obesity, which leads to increased serum estrogen levels, is increasing in AIPA women29. AIPA women are at higher risk for developing weight-related diseases such as type II diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidemia, coronary heart diseases and cancer even at lower body mass index levels compared to NHW women29, suggesting possible differences in body composition. Data on breast tissue, body mass index, body composition, estrogen levels and other obesity-related biomarkers in pre- and postmenopausal AIPA women are not available in our current study. A detailed study of these factors is needed to fill the knowledge gap regarding their role on breast incidence in the AIPA population.
In our analyses, as well as in prior works based on breast cancer cases diagnosed from 1988 to 20066 and 1988 to 20087, AIPA cases were younger than NHW cases. In the SEER cancer incidence database, the at-risk population of AIPA women were younger than NHW women. Thus, we conjecture that the characteristics of breast cancer in AIPA women examined in this paper very likely reflects disease occurring in this relatively young at-risk population. In our analyses, as also observed in a prior work8, AIPA women had more aggressive disease than NHW cases even after adjusting for age, ER status and PR status. In age-adjusted analyses, compared to NHW cases, AIPA cases had 16% lower odds of local stage tumors than regional or distant stage tumors, and 37% higher odds of grade 3 or 4 tumors than grade 1 or 2 tumors (see Supplementary Tables S4 and S5).
Therefore, studies of breast tissue, tissue aging, genetic, hormonal, clinical, reproductive and lifestyle factors, are warranted to better understand potential drivers of aggressive disease in AIPA women. These data are not available from the SEER databases. Hence, independent studies of AIPA breast cancer cases that collect comprehensive data on these risk factors are needed. Studies of genetic risk factors for breast cancer in AIPA women are currently lacking30, and data on reproductive factors are sparse. In studies conducted in Asia, mean ages at menarche for Asian Indian and Pakistani women were 13.8 years and 11.7 years, respectively31,32; median ages at first child birth were 19.8 years and 22.2 years, respectively33, and the mean ages at menopause were 46.2 and 47.1 years, respectively34,35. In contrast, the median age at menarche for NHW women in the United States is 12.8 years36, mean age at first child birth is 26.3 years37,38, and median age at menopause is 51.2 years38. Studies in AIPA breast cancer survivors are also needed to examine whether early age at first child birth contributes to overall lower incidence by lowering the risk of ER+ cancers but increased proportion of ER- tumors.
The proportion of breast cancers diagnosed annually in AIPA women increased over the years, suggesting potentially increasing mammography screening in these women. However, a recent study found that mammography screening decreased in AIPA women between 2001 and 200939. Recent studies of cancer screening have identified several socio-cultural factors associated with delay in seeking health care as well as poor mammogram rates in AIPA women, including lack of family support, lack of transportation, modesty, fear, karmic beliefs that cancer is divine punishment for past deeds, having lived in the US for less than 10 years, low English proficiency, and ethno-cultural discordance in the health system40–42. Further work is needed to identify strategies for promoting nuanced interactions between health care workers and AIPA individuals by effectively understanding and addressing myriad socio-cultural factors associated with screening decisions in this population.
Despite having aggressive disease, relative to NHW cases, AIPA cases had significantly lower hazard for death due breast cancer and death due to other causes under both sub-distribution and cause-specific hazard models. In survival analyses, when the cause-specific hazard ratios of a variable for competing events of interest are of opposite directions, the variable may be interpreted to have an indirect effect on the cumulative incidence of one of the events43,44. However, in our analyses, the cause-specific hazard ratios of AIPA (relative to NHW) race/ethnicity for death due to breast cancer and death due to other causes were both smaller than 1. Similar results emanated for the sub-distribution hazard ratios of AIPA race/ethnicity for the two events. Further, for each event, analyses based on the sub-distribution and cause-specific hazard functions gave hazard ratios of similar magnitudes for AIPA race/ethnicity. These observations suggest that the lower hazard ratio of AIPA race/ethnicity for death due to breast cancer is unlikely to be due to an indirect effect of race/ethnicity on death due to competing causes. In other words, dying of other causes is not the reason why AIPA race/ethnicity has lower hazard ratio for death due to breast cancer. Further investigations are required to understand the reasons why AIPA cases have significantly lower hazard for death due to breast cancer than NHW cases. An important characteristic of these data is the short median follow-up of AIPA cases than NHW cases. Whether AIPA will continue to have lower cumulative incidence of death due to breast cancer than NHW cases even after comparable follow-up of the two populations is an important question that requires a comprehensive investigation of the characteristics of follow-up care in AIPA breast cancer survivors or putative barriers to follow-up in these individuals. We followed all the cases for M months since their time of diagnosis, and set M = 36, 48 and 52 months. This gave comparable follow-up of the two populations. However, AIPA cases continued to have significantly lower hazard for death due to breast cancer in multivariate analyses for all these choices of M (see Supplementary Tables S6, S7 and S8). Therefore, further investigations of a systematically assembled and followed cohort of AIPA breast cancer survivors are needed to better understand follow-up patterns of AIPA cases. Also needed are a detailed inquiry into unique cultural nuances that might influence follow-up, including spiritual needs, language support needs, fear of cancer and disease recurrence, social stigma, cultural and religious beliefs, and values45.
Several important limitations need to be considered when evaluating the results of this study. The AIPA population is younger than the NHW population, and there were considerably more NHW cases than AIPA cases. These are to be expected since Asian Indians and Pakistanis migrate to the United States primarily to seek education and a livelihood and, thus, are likely to be of the younger generation. AIPA cases had shorter median follow-up than NHW cases. Information about follow-up patterns of AIPA were not available. The registries included in the SEER 18 database cover only 28% of the entire US population46. There is a large AIPA population in other metropolitan regions such as Chicago, Dallas, Houston, New York, and Washington DC (6) that are not part of SEER registries. Stage, grade, ER status and PR status were missing for some women. The reason behind these missing data are, however, not known. SEER provides limited data on treatment, and we have used all available treatment information – namely, chemotherapy, radiation therapy and surgery (type of mastectomy) – in our analyses. Our analyses are not adjusted for comorbidities since comorbidity data are not available from SEER. Addressing these limitations will require a well-designed study of AIPA breast cancer survivors.
In summary, our study found that breast cancer incidence increases with age in AIPA women and the rate of increase reduces after age 46 years. The AIPA population of women is younger than NHW women. AIPA women have early age at onset, more aggressive breast cancer phenotypes, and shorter median follow-up compared to NHW women. Breast cancer in AIPA women have specific characteristics that need to be further studied for understanding disease etiology and outcomes in this understudied and growing population.
Supplementary Material
Supplementary Material.
