record_id=80 pmid=39132985 doi=10.1158/1055-9965.epi-24-0647 pmcid=PMC11451936
TITLE: Breast, Colorectal, and Prostate Cancer Incidence among Filipino Americans by Generational Status in the Multiethnic Cohort Study

Introduction
Breast, colorectal, and prostate cancer are three common cancers with large geographic variations in incidence rates (1). Compared to their country of origin, the Philippines (PH), Filipino Americans in Hawaii (HI) and in the US, specifically Los Angeles county, experience elevated cancer incidence rates for these cancer sites (2). The respective age-standardized rates (world standard population per 100,000) of the PH vs. Filipinos in HI for years 2013–2017 were as follows: breast (56.1 vs 85.9); colon (16.2 vs 19.0, men and 10.8 vs 13.0, women); rectum (10.1 vs 15.9 men; 5.6 vs 9.1 women); prostate (23.6 vs 59.1) (2). Filipinos make up a major migrant group in the US (3), with a particularly high number of Filipino Americans in Hawaii, estimated at 200,000, while California is the state with the largest number of Filipinos at 1.7M (4). Research on cancer incidence among migrants has enhanced our understanding of how changes in lifestyle factors and exposures may contribute to cancer risk (5, 6). In particular, an increase of cancer incidence among those transitioning from low to high-risk countries has been well documented for Japanese and Filipino Americans whose incidence rates now mirror those in the host country (7, 8). This increase may be attributed to acculturation, wherein migrants assimilate aspects of the culture and behavior of the host country, e.g., adoption of a Westernized diet resulting in overweight and obesity, as well as other risk factors such as smoking and alcohol consumption (9). To explore the impact of migration or generational status on cancer incidence among individuals who self-reported as Filipino, we prospectively investigated the associations of generational status with breast, colorectal, and prostate cancer incidence using the Multiethnic Cohort (MEC) study.
Materials and Methods
Study population.
The MEC is a prospective cohort designed to identify risk factors for chronic diseases across a diverse population (10). Between 1993 and 1996, a baseline questionnaire (QX1) was mailed to adults aged 45–75 years residing in Hawaii and California, with responses from more than 215,000 participants. The primary sampling frame were driver’s licenses and supplemented with Voters Registration, with a target population of African American, Native Hawaiian, Japanese American, Latino and White individuals predicted by surnames and zip codes; actual race and ethnicity were not known. Therefore, individuals with ancestries outside of the targeted groups received and responded to the questionnaire (10).
On QX1, participants provided information on place of birth, race and ethnicity, and place of birth of father and mother, as well as on socio-demographics, anthropometrics, lifestyle factors, medical history, and family history of cancer. Generational status was defined as follows: 1st: born in the Philippines and migrated to the US (57.9%), with both parents born in the Philippines; 2nd: one parent born in the US and one in the Philippines; and 3rd or more: both parents born in the US.
Participants provided information on socio-demographics, lifestyle factors, medical history, and reproductive factors at cohort entry. Cohort members completed an extensive Food Frequency Questionnaire, which contributed >85% of the intake for nutrients of interest for each ethnic group (11). For the current study, we selected all participants who self-reported Filipino as one of their ethnic backgrounds independent of the number of other ancestries checked (n=10,529). We excluded prevalent cancer cases (686 colorectal cancer (CRC), 537 breast, and 329 prostate), based on questionnaire and cancer registry information and those with missing migrant status (n=88). The final sample size for analysis was 10,495. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the University of Hawaii and the University of Southern California.
Cancer incidence.
Participants were prospectively followed for diagnosis of primary incident invasive breast, colorectal, and prostate cancer, identified by linkage to the statewide Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) cancer registries of Hawaii and California. Incidence rates were age-standardized to the US 2000 population. There were 373 breast, 249 colorectal, and 436 prostate cancer cases diagnosed after cohort entry. Cancer ascertainment was complete through December 31, 2017.
Statistical analysis.
Cox proportional hazards models of colorectal, breast, and prostate cancer with age as the time metric were used to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Follow-up started at age at cohort entry and ended at either date of diagnosis of the respective cancer, death, or end of follow-up (December 31, 2017), whichever came first. Model 1 was adjusted for age at cohort entry for all cancer sites. For Model 2, potential covariates differed by cancer site (Tables 1–3) and were chosen based on associations found in the literature and/or prior MEC studies (12–16). The final set of covariates was selected via stepwise regression with a criteria of p<0.20. Colorectal cancer was adjusted for sex, education, alcohol intake, type 2 diabetes (T2D), family history of colon cancer, smoking status, pack-years, and intake of processed red meat plus the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), multivitamin, vitamin D, and menopausal hormones in women. Breast cancer models included body mass index (BMI), education, number of children, and age at natural menopause. Prostate cancer was adjusted for smoking status, family history of prostate cancer, and marital status. Missing values for categorical variables were included as a separate category. The evaluation of differences across generational status, whether 1st generation differed from the 2nd or 3rd were based on the Wald test. The proportional hazards assumption was evaluated based on the test of interaction of time and covariates; assumptions were met. As a sensitivity analysis, we repeated the models in those who reported screening for breast cancer (mammography, 79.9%), colorectal cancer (sigmoidoscopy/colonoscopy, 17.8%), and prostate cancer (prostate specific antigen (PSA), 20.8%). Information on mammography utilization was obtained from the baseline questionnaire, whereas PSA and colonoscopy/sigmoidoscopy were available at 5-year follow-up (QX2). Statistical significance was defined as p <0.05. Data analyses were conducted using SAS, version 9.4 (Cary, NC) and R.
Data availability.
The data used in this manuscript may be available upon request to the MEC Research Committee (https://www.uhcancercenter.org/for-researchers/mec-data-sharing).
Results
Among the 10,495 participants who self-identified as Filipino (Table 1), 26.8% were of mixed race and ethnicity, 68.1% were from HI and 31.9% from California; and 58% were 1st, 17% were 2nd, and 25% were 3rd generation. The relative proportion of individuals who reported a Filipino father or mother were 95% and 85%. During a mean follow-up time of 20.1 years (colorectal), 20.4 years (breast), and 18.6 years (prostate), the respective proportions of participants diagnosed with cancer were 2.4%, 6.8%, and 9.2%. The respective percentages for 1st, 2nd, and 3rd generation were: 2.1%, 2.9%, and 2.7% for colorectal, 6.2%, 7.0%, and 7.8% for breast, and 10.2%, 8.0%, and 7.3% for prostate cancer. The age-standardized rates (World population) and age-truncated (≥ 45 years), for colorectal cancer increased from 79 to 122 per 100,000 from the 1st to the 3rd generation. 1st generation breast cancer rates increased, and prostate cancer rates decreased.
At cohort entry, the mean (SD) age of all Filipino participants was 57.7 (8.3) years, with varying age at diagnosis by cancer site: colorectal, breast, and prostate were 71.2 (9.7), 68.2 (9.4), and 72.3 (7.3) years, respectively. As to risk factors, higher educational attainment, prevalence of obesity, and among women current use of menopausal hormone therapy increased by generational status (Table 1). Also, alcohol consumption was higher in later generations as well as consumption of processed meat and the use of NSAIDs. Among women, we observed higher T2D prevalence, a younger age at menarche, a younger age at first childbirth, and surgical menopause, with a decline for natural menopause by generational status. Higher educational attainment and having ≥4 children was more common in the 1st generation. (Table 2). Among men, the proportion with a family history of prostate cancer, BMI, and those with a marital status of being separated, divorced, or widowed also increased. Higher educational attainment was lower than in the 1st generation, while PSA screening and ever smokers were higher than those of the 1st generation without a clear trend (Table 3).
The incidence of colorectal cancer increased by generational status (Table 4) with respective HRs of 1.43 (95% CI: 1.04, 1.98) and 1.76 (95% CI: 1.29, 2.38) for 2nd and 3rd vs. 1st generation in Model 1. This elevated risk was limited to men with HRs of 1.67 (95% CI: 1.09, 2.56) and 2.14 (95% CI: 1.44, 3.18) for the 2nd and 3rd vs. 1st generation while no significant association was seen among women HR 1.15 (95% CI: 0.70, 1.90) and HR 1.34 (95% CI: 0.83, 2.16) (phet men vs. women=0.12). After full adjustment for covariates in Model 2, the risk estimates were attenuated and no longer significant with the exception of the association among men of 3rd vs. 1st generation (HR 1.43; 95% CI: 1.09, 1.87). Compared to 1st generation participants, 3rd generation Filipinas showed a 29% higher risk of breast cancer (HR 1.29; 95% CI: 1.01, 1.63) in Model 1, which slightly increased when fully adjusted for relevant covariates (HR 1.39; 95% CI: 1.03, 1.87). The higher breast cancer risk for the 2nd vs. 1st generation was not statistically significant (HR 1.28; 95% CI: 0.93,1.79). The comparison of 2nd to 1st generation Filipino men indicated a 24% lower incidence of prostate cancer (HR 0.76; 95% CI: 0.58, 0.99), whereas risk for the 3rd generation did not differ from the 1st generation (HR 0.94; 95% CI: 0.73,1.22). Adjustment for relevant covariates attenuated the risk estimates slightly and significance was lost. The results among participants who reported any type of cancer screening were similar.
Due to the very small number of 1st generation Filipinos admixed with Native Hawaiian ancestry (11.3%), a sensitivity analysis excluding part-Hawaiians was performed (n= 9,307) and resulted in similar findings (Supplemental Table 1).
Discussion
Among self-reported Filipino males in the MEC, a higher colorectal cancer incidence was observed among 2nd and 3rd than 1st generation. Given the attenuation of the risk estimates after adjustment for risk factors, it appears that differences in risk factor profiles across generations may be responsible for the increase in incidence. These include higher rates of obesity, T2D, alcohol intake, and smoking. Likewise, breast cancer incidence was significantly elevated, with a close to 40% higher risk among 3rd vs. 1st generation women, but adjustment for established risk factors, e.g., BMI and reproductive risk factors, did not weaken the association. For prostate cancer, a moderately lower incidence of prostate cancer was observed in the 2nd but not in the 3rd generation.
For colorectal and breast cancer, increasing incidence among migrants has been attributed to changing risk factor profiles among migrant generations due to acculturation, metabolic disease, and reproductive and lifestyle factors (7, 9, 17). As successive generations experience a modified exposure to risk factors and adopt the behaviors and lifestyles of the host culture, they tend to develop a similar risk of developing cancer as the host population (8). Colorectal cancer risk factors include male sex, family history of CRC, T2D, overweight and obesity, diet, smoking history, and alcohol consumption (18, 19). Physical inactivity, intake of red meat, processed meat, and low intake of fiber are additional risk factors for colorectal cancer (5). Among Mexican Americans, an association between lower intake of native foods and higher colorectal cancer incidence was reported (17). As Filipino migrants undergo acculturation in the US, changes in dietary practices have been demonstrated. This transition involves eating fewer Filipino foods and a shift toward adopting energy dense processed foods, possibly leading to obesity and consequently, a higher susceptibility to chronic diseases such as T2D (8, 20).
As for breast cancer, extensive reports of Japanese migrants have documented higher incidence in the 2nd and 3rd compared to 1st generation, and current rates are higher than White individuals (21). An early study comparing Japanese Americans born in California, Hawaii, and Japan, with White individuals showed lower incidence among Japanese women born in Japan and similar incidence rates for US-born Japanese women as for White individuals (22). Rising incidence rates may also partially be due to selection bias, called the healthy migrant hypothesis, sometimes known as the “immigrant paradox”, meaning that individuals who migrate to a new country have a better health status than the general population in their country of origin (23). The Health of Philippine Emigrants Study (HoPES) found that a group of Filipino migrants reported significantly better health, less depression, lower waist-to-hip ratio, and larger hip circumference than a similar cohort residing in the Philippines (24).
In the current study, obesity, a well-known risk factor for breast (among post-menopausal women) and colorectal cancer (5, 6, 19), increased by generational status. Similar obesity trends have been observed in other migrant populations such as the Hmong American, Korean American immigrants, Mexican Americans, and other groups (25). The 2003 National Survey of Children’s Health among 12 immigrant groups in the US estimated that first-generation immigrant children had 26% lower odds of being obese compared to second generation US-born children (26). These generational differences in BMI may be due to the acculturation and the adoption of the American diet in later generations leading to weight gain (17, 27, 28).
Filipino Americans have also been reported to be at a higher risk of developing T2D as a result of being obese or overweight, which may contribute to the increasing colorectal and breast cancer incidence observed in our population (29). As a proposed mechanism of action, the state of chronic metabolic dysregulation associated with T2D and obesity may increase cancer risk through hyperinsulinemia, insulin-like growth factor 1, dyslipidemia, and hyperglycemia (30).
Reproductive risk factors for breast cancer include younger age at menarche, older age at first birth, and nulliparity (6, 31, 32). In pursuing higher education, women have been shown to postpone childbirth to later ages (33, 34), thereby prolonging the exposure of undifferentiated breast tissue to endogenous ovarian hormones (31, 32). In agreement with previous findings, our study found that the 1st generation had an older age of menarche, lower menopausal hormone use, and lower rates of obesity. However, higher education, older age at first live birth, and having no children were higher in 1st generation than later generations. These results are similar to published evidence of breast cancer among Filipino migrants (35) and other studies reporting a higher risk of breast cancer in US-born versus foreign-born Asian Americans (36–38). Modifiable behaviors, such as smoking and alcohol consumption, are additional risk factors for colorectal and breast cancer (6), for which changes by generational status were seen in the current study. Family history of cancer was higher in later generations than in the 1st generation in this study.
Our results are similar to other migrant studies on prostate cancer as possible lifestyle, environmental, and genetic factors as well as the influence of screening behavior and access to health care are poorly understood (39, 40). The seemingly paradoxical observation that men with diabetes experience a reduced risk of prostate cancer (40) may help explain our inverse findings, considering that the proportion of T2D was higher in 2nd and 3rd generation compared to 1st.
This study’s strengths included its prospective design, the large sample size, and the long follow-up time for an understudied ethnic group. The availability of and adjustment for multiple covariates, including lifestyle factors, family history, and reproductive factors, strengthen our analyses. Lastly, we were able to capture multi-generational Filipino Americans to make comparisons in cancer risk. While recruitment was conducted in two US states with the largest Filipino populations (41), the results may not represent all Filipino Americans across the country and, thereby, limit generalizability to other regions. We were unable to account for other factors such as socioeconomic status, which might influence the observed associations. Other limitations include the inability to assess changes in lifestyle factors, as covariates were obtained at cohort entry, the uncertainty about secondary cancers, unknown loss to follow-up due to out-migration, and the small number of cases that limited stratified analyses by state. The healthy migrant hypothesis is a valuable framework, but it may oversimplify the complex interplay of factors influencing cancer risk, neglecting nuances within the acculturation process.
The findings of this study in the MEC underscore the need to explore how changing risk factor profiles influence cancer risk among Filipino Americans, specifically among men for colon cancer and among women for breast cancer. It appears that the major contributors to higher colorectal and breast cancer risks in Filipino migrants include obesity, T2D, reproductive risk factors and behavior, and lifestyle factors, i.e. smoking and alcohol consumption. Similar findings have been observed in other migrant groups. Future studies are warranted to discover strategies to mitigate cancer risks in immigrant populations.
Supplementary Material
1
