1 Introduction Cancer fatalism is generally conceptualized as the belief that cancer diagnosis is uncontrollable and predetermined. It encompasses a perceived inability to prevent or recover from cancer [ 1 , 2 , 3 ], negative emotions regarding cancer outcomes, such as hopelessness, and related feelings [ 4 ]. Existing research shows that cancer fatalism is associated with low knowledge about preventative behaviors and greater cancer‐related anxiety [ 4 , 5 , 6 ]. As a result, it negatively impacts cancer prevention behaviors, such as physical activity, healthy diet, not smoking, and cancer screenings [ 7 , 8 ]. Cancer fatalism has been shown to be higher among socioeconomically disadvantaged and racial and ethnic minoritized groups [ 3 , 4 ]. Some research indicates that Asian Americans are more likely to view the development of cancer as predetermined or inevitable compared with their counterparts [ 9 , 10 ], and this fatalistic view often leads to lower cancer screening uptake [ 11 , 12 ]. There are approximately 22 million Asian Americans, and this population is projected to reach 46 million by 2060 [ 13 , 14 ]. Asian Americans come from 30+ countries and speak 100+ languages and dialects with unique histories, socioeconomic profiles, and religious and cultural beliefs [ 15 , 16 , 17 ]. Yet, research on cancer outcomes and behaviors of Asian Americans frequently combines all Asian origin groups (e.g., Japanese, Korean, Vietnamese) into a single category [ 12 , 18 , 19 ], which masks potential disparities experienced by the origin group. While some research has explored cancer fatalism in Asian Americans, they have mostly reported aggregated data for Asian Americans as a whole instead of disaggregating levels of cancer fatalism by origin group [ 9 , 10 ]. Our study builds upon few existing studies that explore variations in cancer fatalism among distinct Asian origin groups [ 20 ]. Our study enriches the existing literature by providing updated recent data and including comparative analyses with Hispanic and non‐Hispanic Black groups, thereby offering a broader perspective on cancer fatalism across diverse populations. Using the latest data from the Health Information National Trends Survey (HINTS) [ 21 ], we conducted a disaggregated analysis of cancer fatalism among Asian origin groups (Chinese, Filipino, Indian, Vietnamese, and other Asian respondents), Hispanic, non‐Hispanic White (NHW), and non‐Hispanic Black (NHB) groups. This study provides insights for the development of tailored strategies for diverse Asian American origin groups that improve understanding about cancer. 2 Methods We analyzed cancer fatalism using seven cycles of HINTS (2012–2022), a nationally representative cross‐sectional survey administered by the National Cancer Institute. The complex survey weights were generated annually to adjust for nonresponse and implemented through a jackknife replication method with 50 replications. For multiple years of data analysis, composite weights were employed. Additional details about HINTS are included in Appendix A . The survey consists of cancer fatalism‐related questions with response options on a Likert scale (1 = Strongly agree to 4 = Strongly disagree). We analyzed two statements: “It seems like everything causes cancer” and “There's not much you can do to lower your chances of cancer.” The primary exposure was racial and ethnic groups: response options in the survey included Chinese, Filipino, Indian, Vietnamese, or of other Asian origins (e.g., Korean, Japanese). NHW, NHB, and Hispanic respondents were included for comparative purposes. Appendix B provides detailed distributions of the sample by cycle and by sociodemographic characteristics (age, sex, and education). Bivariate analyses were conducted to estimate and compare weighted proportions across racial and ethnic groups. Pairwise comparisons were conducted to assess differences between each racial and ethnic group. All statistical analyses were conducted using PROC SURVEY procedures in SAS software, version 9.4 (SAS Institute), to account for the complex survey design and weights. Statistical significance was set at a Bonferroni‐corrected threshold of p 1.8 ×10 −3 . 3 Results Of a total of 24,869 participants, there were 4181 Hispanic, 15,695 NHW, 3870 NHB respondents, and 1123 Asian respondents (of whom 25.56% were Chinese, 19.41% Filipino, 19.59% Indian, 10.86% Vietnamese, and 24.58% Other Asian). The proportion of Asian respondents who somewhat or strongly agreed with the statement, “It seems like everything causes cancer,” in descending order, were 75.18% for Filipino, 74.59% for Vietnamese, 66.28% for “Other Asian”, 54.77% for Chinese, and 40.36% for Indian respondents (Figure 1 ). In particular, there was a significantly lower proportion of Indian respondents (40.36%) indicating agreement compared with Filipino (75.18%, p = 0.0009), Vietnamese (74.59%, p = 0.0002), and “Other Asian” (66.28%, p = 0.0005) respondents. Moreover, there was a significantly lower proportion of Indian respondents indicating agreement compared with Hispanic (65.81%, p = 0.0003), NHW (69.01%, p 0.0001), and NHB (66.91% [64.04%–69.78%], p = 0.0002) respondents. While there was relative heterogeneity in the responses by Asian origin group, the responses among the other racial and ethnic groups appeared to be more similarly distributed. There were no significant differences between proportions of Hispanic, NHW, and NHB respondents who indicated agreement. FIGURE 1 Proportion of respondents indicating they somewhat or strongly agreed to the statement: “It seems like everything causes cancer” by race and ethnicity. We further investigated possible differences in the proportions of respondents who indicated that they strongly agreed with this statement by race and ethnicity (Appendix B ). Among Asian participants, there was a significantly lower proportion of Indian (9.76%) respondents indicating strong agreement compared with Filipino (27.81%, p = 0.0002) and Vietnamese (31.10%, p = 0.0006) respondents. There were no significant differences in the responses of Hispanic (23.04%), NHW (19.98%), and NHB (23.97%) respondents. A significantly lower proportion of Indian and Chinese respondents indicated strong agreement compared with Hispanic, NHW, and NHB respondents (all p values 0.0018). The proportions of Asian respondents that agreed with the statement, “There's not much you can do to lower your chances of getting cancer,” in descending order, were 38.29% for Vietnamese, 36.99% for “Other Asian”, 31.68% for Chinese, 30.63% for Indian, and 29.83% for Filipino respondents (Figure 2 ). Differences between Asian origin groups did not reach statistical significance when compared with results from Hispanic, NHW, and NHB respondents. FIGURE 2 Proportion of respondents indicating they somewhat or strongly agreed to the statement: “There's not much you can do to lower your chances of cancer” by race and ethnicity. We further investigated possible differences in the proportions of respondents who indicated strong agreement with this statement by race and ethnicity (Appendix B ). Among “Other Asian” respondents (5.28%), we observed the lowest proportion of respondents indicating strong agreement, while the highest proportion was seen among Vietnamese respondents (14.19%). Differences across Asian origin groups did not reach statistical significance. 4 Discussion In this study, using nationally representative survey data, we found significant differences in responses to the statement “It seems like everything causes cancer” by Asian origin group. We found that 75.18% of Filipino and 74.59% of Vietnamese respondents indicated agreement, while 40.36% of Indian respondents did so. Moreover, 9.76% of Indian respondents strongly agreed with the statement, while 27.81% of Filipino and 31.10% of Vietnamese respondents did so. Additionally, more Asian respondents in all origin groups agreed with the statement “There's not much you can do to lower your chances of cancer” compared with NHW respondents, even though differences did not reach significance. Findings highlight the need for culturally tailored interventions that consider heterogeneous cancer fatalism levels, as opposed to one‐size‐fits‐all approaches. Observed differences in cancer fatalism among Asian origin groups may be due to their distinct immigration patterns to the United States and the associated economic motivations and opportunities available to these groups. For example, around half of Indian immigrants obtain US permanent residency through employer sponsorship, while this is less common for Chinese (a fifth), Filipino (one‐in‐eighth), and Vietnamese (1%) immigrants [ 22 ]. In contrast to many Asian groups who immigrated for economic and educational reasons, the majority of Vietnamese Americans came to the United States as political refugees [ 23 ]. These diverse immigration histories affect educational attainment, English proficiency, and poverty [ 13 ], which in turn differentially shape structural barriers to healthcare and, consequently, cancer knowledge and preventative behaviors [ 24 ]. Moreover, different Asian origin groups may have varying beliefs about cancer and their acceptance of prevention and treatment methods due to their diverse languages, religions, and cultures [ 17 , 18 , 25 ]. Traditional Chinese medicine views cancer formation as an imbalance of the body's “Yin and Yang,” [ 26 ] while Ayurvedic medicine views it as a result of an imbalance between the three doshas (vata, kapha, and pitta—energies believed to govern physiological activity) [ 27 ]. While many Chinese Americans (56%) are not religious, the majority of Filipino Americans identify as Christian (75%) [ 28 ]. Almost half of Indian Americans identify as Hindu, while more than a third of Vietnamese Americans identify as Buddhist [ 28 ]. These religions offer different explanations for cancer and suffering: many Hindus may view suffering as karma, Buddhists as ignorance, and Christians as something to be alleviated by God [ 29 ]. Existing literature offers a few examples of interventions to address cancer fatalism [ 30 , 31 ]. If the belief is rooted in religious faith, emphasizing personal responsibility alongside faith may help [ 31 ]. Other strategies can include reducing structural barriers to cancer care through financial assistance programs [ 32 ], educational materials to increase health literacy [ 4 ], and community health worker‐led programs [ 33 ]. Integrating culturally tailored interventions with broader multilevel strategies that reduce structural barriers can effectively target cancer fatalism in diverse populations. This study has several limitations. There was a relatively small sample size of Asian origin groups in the dataset when compared with Hispanic, NHW, and NHB respondents. A larger sample size may have allowed us to detect more significant differences across groups. Moreover, the dataset did not include variables related to immigration reasons, immigration status (e.g., citizenship or visa status), or acculturation, which could have elucidated additional structural or sociocultural mechanisms underlying cancer fatalism. 5 Conclusion We provide insights into heterogeneous cancer fatalism levels among Asian origin groups. Understanding these differences is critical for designing culturally tailored interventions addressing cancer fatalism and ultimately improving cancer prevention and treatment in diverse Asian American populations. Author Contributions Justine Liu contributed to the writing of the original draft, visualization, and reviewing and editing of the manuscript. Yenan Zhu contributed to the methodology, validation, writing review and editing, software development, formal analysis, and data curation. Ryan Suk contributed to validation and writing review and editing. Milkie Vu, as the corresponding and submitting author, contributed to supervision, writing review and editing, funding acquisition, and project administration. Conflicts of Interest The authors declare no conflicts of interest.