Dtsch Arztebl Int Dtsch Arztebl Int 870 dai 101475967 Deutscher Arzte Verlag Deutsches Ärzteblatt International 1866-0452 Deutscher Arzte-Verlag GmbH PMC13270979 PMC13270979.1 13270979 13270979 41060639 10.3238/arztebl.m2025.0173 arztebl-122-648-0173 1 Continuing Medical Education Preventive Measures for Patients with an Elevated Genetic Risk for Gynecological Malignancies, in Particular Familial Breast and Ovarian Cancer Ditsch Nina Prof. Dr. med. Aktas Bahriye Prof. Dr. med. Banys-Paluchowski Maggie Prof. Dr. med. Speiser Dorothee Prof. Dr. med. Golas Monika M. Prof. Dr. rer. nat. Fasching Peter A. Prof. Dr. med. Gynecology, Obstetrics and Senology, Breast Center, CCC Augsburg, University Hospital Augsburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Augsburg, Augsburg, Germany, Comprehensive Cancer Center Augsburg, Augsburg,Bavarian Cancer Research Center (BZKF) , Erlangen , Germany Clinic and Polyclinic for Gynaecology, Centre for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer, Comprehensive Cancer Center Central Germany, Universitätsklinikum Leipzig Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein Campus Lübeck , Lübeck , Germany Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Augsburg, and Faculty of Medicine, University of Augsburg, Comprehensive Cancer Center Augsburg , Augsburg , Germany Department of Gynecology with Breast Center, Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Center, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin , Berlin , Germany Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Comprehensive Cancer Center ER-EMN, Universitätsklinikum, Friedrich-AlexanderUniversität, Erlangen-Nürnberg Corresponding author Prof. Dr. med. Nina Ditsch nina.ditsch@uk-augsburg.de Translated from the original German by Ethan Taub, M.D. Conflict of interest statement: MMG has received reimbursement of travel expenses from the German Society for Senology. PAF has received funding from Biontech, Pfizer, Cepheid, Novartis, Daiichi-Sankyo, AstraZeneca, Eisai, Merck, Sharp Dohme, Lilly, SeaGen, Roche, Agendia, Gilead, Mylan, Menarini, Veracyte, and GuardantHealth. BA has served as a paid consultant for, and has received lecture honoraria and reimbursement of travel expenses from, AstraZeneca. MBP has served as a paid consultant for, and has received honoraria for presentations from, the following companies: Roche, Novartis, Pfizer, pfm, Eli Lilly, Onkowissen, Seagen, AstraZeneca, Eisai, Amgen, Samsung, Canon, MSD, GSK, Daiichi Sankyo, Gilead, Sirius Medical, Syantra, resitu, Pierre Fabre, and ExactSciences. She has received reimbursement for travel expenses and/or meeting attendance fees from Eli Lilly, ExactSciences, Pierre Fabre, Pfizer, Daiichi Sankyo, Roche, and Stemline. DS has received lecture honoraria from, and has served as a paid consultant for, AstraZeneca and Pfizer. ND is on the advisory boards of Gilead, Lilly, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Seagen, and Exact Sciences. She has received lecture honoraria from AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Exact Sciences, Pierre Fabre, I-Med Institute, Merit Medical, pfm medical, Medi-Seminar GmbH, Roche, Lilly, Pfizer, Gilead, Novartis, and Onkowissen. She has received grants from pfm medical ag for manuscript preparation and research funding from Gilead and BZKF. 11 2025 14 11 2025 122 23 514940 648 654 24 3 2025 29 9 2025 14 11 2025 17 06 2026 24 06 2026 © Deutscher Ärzte-Verlag GmbH. 2025 Summary Background: Approximately 70 550 women receive a diagnosis of breast cancer in Germany each year. Ovarian cancer is much rarer, with approximately 7180 new cases per year. A woman’s individual risk of breast and ovarian cancer can be quantitatively estimated with tools that are available online; these are playing an increasingly important role in genetic counseling. Environmental factors, lifestyles, and discoveries in epigenetics all need to be taken into account. An understanding of potential preventive measures for patients at elevated genetic risk of gynecological malignancies is becoming increasingly important for precise counseling in clinical practice. Methods: We conducted a literature search in PubMed up to September 2025, taking into account current guidelines on primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention for women at elevated genetic risk of gynecological malignancies, with a particular focus on familial breast and ovarian cancer. Results: The lifetime risk of breast cancer in women with a pathogenic variant of the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene is approximately 70%. For ovarian cancer, it is approximately 44% and 17%, respectively. Primary prevention includes risk-reducing surgery such as mastectomy and oophorectomy/salpingectomy, as well as the use of certain preventive drugs. An intensified early detection program for breast cancer is a secondary prevention measure. Tertiary prevention includes the option of further risk-reducing measures, such as contralateral mastectomy and the use of PARP inhibitors, for women already under treatment for hereditary breast or ovarian cancer. Conclusion: This article highlights the wide range of preventive options available for hereditary gynecological malignancies. pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access no pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement no pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes