INTRODUCTION In the US, breast cancer (BC) is the most diagnosed cancer among Asian, Hispanic, and non-Hispanic White (NHW) women, many of whom are immigrants ( 1 – 3 ). Since the enactment of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 and the subsequent Immigration Act of 1990, the composition of the immigrant population has shifted from 90% European to less than 10% European, with 27% and 49% coming from Asian and Latin American countries, respectively ( 4 ). In the US, recent estimates indicate that immigrants comprise 57% of the Asian population ( 5 ) and 32% of the Hispanic population ( 6 ). Given rising BC risk in Asian and Hispanic populations, and high risk in NHW women ( 7 – 10 ), it is crucial to explore how nativity influences modifiable lifestyle behaviors which have been associated with better BC survivorship ( 11 – 21 ). After a diagnosis of BC, a healthy lifestyle is critical to reducing the risks of recurrence ( 11 , 12 ) and mortality ( 13 – 18 ), as well as ensuring a better quality of life ( 19 – 21 ). Accordingly, the World Cancer Research Fund and American Institute for Cancer Research (WCRF/AICR) published a set of cancer prevention recommendations which are also recommended for cancer survivors ( 22 ). These include maintaining a healthy weight, being physically active, and limiting intake of fast/processed foods, red or processed meat, sugary drinks, and alcohol, while increasing consumption of fruits and vegetables (F V) and whole grains ( 22 ). In BC survivors, meeting a greater number of healthy lifestyle recommendations has been associated with lower cancer mortality risk ( 13 , 14 ) and improved health-related quality of life ( 19 , 21 ), underscoring the importance of assessing overall healthy lifestyle and not only individual behaviors. No prior studies have evaluated associations of nativity with overall lifestyle in women with BC, and only two have evaluated associations with individual health behaviors in women with BC ( 23 , 24 ). In one study, foreign-born Latina BC survivors were found to have a lower body mass index (BMI), smaller waist and hip circumference, and higher diet quality than US-born Latina survivors ( 23 ). Another study showed foreign-born women with BC were less likely to be current smokers and smoked less pack-years than US-born women with BC ( 24 ). Research is needed to understand how nativity influences lifestyle in women with BC since a diagnosis itself may influence health behaviors. Therefore, we investigated associations between nativity with a healthy lifestyle index (HLI) and individual lifestyle behaviors based on WCRF/AICR recommendations in a diverse cohort of 4,754 female BC survivors from Northern California. Based on findings from prior research, we hypothesized that foreign-born women with BC would exhibit overall healthier lifestyles compared to US-born women with BC. Furthermore, given known differences in lifestyle behaviors across racial and ethnic groups, we hypothesized that lifestyle differences by nativity may further vary by race and ethnicity. METHODS Study population This study included Asian American (henceforth referred to as ‘Asian’), Hispanic, and Non-Hispanic White (NHW) breast cancer (BC) survivors from the Life After Cancer Epidemiology (LACE), Pathways, and Asian Community Healthy Initiative (CHI) cohorts. The LACE cohort included 2,263 women diagnosed with early-stage BC (stage I, II, or IIIA) between 1997–2000 who were recruited primarily from Kaiser Permanente Northern California (KPNC) in 2000–2002 ( 25 ). The Pathways cohort included 4,504 women diagnosed with invasive BC between 2005–2013 who were recruited from KPNC in 2006–2013 ( 26 ). BC survivors from the CHI Study were participants in the Equality in Breast Cancer Care (EBCC) Study who agreed to participate in future research. The EBCC Study included 522 women diagnosed with invasive BC between 2005–2009 who were recruited from the Greater Bay Area Cancer Registry, part of the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) program, in 2011–2012 ( 27 , 28 ). A total of 139 Asian American women from EBCC were recruited into the CHI Study in 2013–2014 ( 28 ). The women in LACE responded to a mailed, self-administered survey in English. The Pathways survey was administered in English, Mandarin, Cantonese, or Spanish at an in-person interview. CHI survey data were collected through phone interviews and self-administered surveys in English, Mandarin, Cantonese, or Tagalog. On average, women from Pathways, LACE, and CHI responded to questionnaires 2 months, 1.8 years, and 4.4 years after diagnosis, respectively. Consent for participation in research was obtained within each study. Additional details of the LACE, Pathways, and CHI cohorts have been previously reported ( 25 – 28 ). LACE participants recruited outside of KPNC were excluded from this analysis due to lack of access to medical records (N=384). From an initial cohort of 6,522 women from the Pathways, LACE, and CHI Studies, only women who identified as Asian, Hispanic, or NHW were included in this study (N=5,905). Women were excluded from this analysis in a stepwise process if they were missing data on nativity (N=49), 33% dietary data in common across the three studies (n=961), waist circumference or BMI (n=117), smoking or alcohol consumption (N=19), physical activity (N=4), or covariates (age at diagnosis, race, or education) (N=1). The final analytic cohort included a total of 4,754 women, comprised of 3,282 women from the Pathways Study, 1,355 women from the LACE Study, and 117 women from the CHI Study. This study was approved by the Kaiser Permanente Northern California Institutional Review Board. Study Variables Immigrant status Nativity The LACE and CHI questionnaires included a question on country of birth. Pathways participants were asked their country of origin. In this study, we categorized nativity as US-born (including US territories) or foreign-born. Healthy Lifestyle Index (HLI) We adapted the HLI measure from the World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research (WCRF/AICR) cancer prevention recommendations operationalized by Shams-White et al ( Table 1 ) ( 22 ). Each recommendation was assigned 1, 0.5, or 0 points for meeting, partially meeting, or not meeting a recommendation, respectively ( 22 ). Categorizations for each lifestyle factor were based on WCRF/AICR cancer prevention recommendations, or the World Health Organization (WHO) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines when WCRF/AICR cut points were not provided ( 22 ). The final set of operationalized recommendations included maintaining a healthy weight; being physically active; limiting consumption of fast/processed foods, red/processed meat, sugary drinks, and alcohol; and increasing consumption of F V, wholegrains, and beans ( 22 ). Due to data availability across the 3 studies, our healthy lifestyle index (HLI) score is a modified version of the Shams-White score ( Table 1 ). We used cohort-specific tertiles for physical activity and consumption of F V and red meat. Instead of sugar-sweetened drinks, we included a measure for consumption of sweets. Data on consumption of fiber or ultra-processed foods were not available across the three cohorts, and we did not include the optional breastfeeding recommendation. We additionally included smoking status given known adverse effects on BC survival ( 24 , 29 ). The HLI score was calculated based on the approach published by Shams-White et al ( 22 ), and HLI score tertiles were created based on the distribution in the overall cohort with the highest tertile representing an optimal pattern. Components of the healthy lifestyle index (HLI) Anthropometry Women in the LACE Study were asked to self-measure height, weight, and waist circumference at study baseline. In the Pathways Study, these measurements were obtained during the in-person interview. In the CHI Study, height and weight were self-reported, and waist circumference was self-assessed using a measuring tape provided in the mailed survey. BMI was computed as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared. We categorized BMI using the cut points specified by the Shams-White approach ( 22 ). In addition, we created a separate measure of BMI incorporating cut points recommended by the World Health Organization for Asian American populations. Diet The women from the LACE Study responded to the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center Food Frequency Questionnaire (FHCRC-FFQ), a self-administered food frequency questionnaire containing over 100 food and beverage items developed by Block et al. ( 30 – 33 ). For each food or beverage item, women responded to questions on frequency and serving size based on their diet in the 12 months before study baseline. The women from the Pathways Study responded to a self-administered 139-item modified version of the Block 2005 food frequency questionnaire (Block FFQ) ( 30 – 33 ). For each food or beverage item, women responded to questions on frequency and serving size based on their diet in the 6 months before study baseline. As part of the baseline questionnaire, women from the CHI Study responded to questions on 26 dietary items adapted from dietary acculturation scales developed in Chinese women and supplemented with questions specific to other Asian ethnicities. Women indicated how frequently they consumed all items and provided portion sizes for few select items on the questionnaire based on their diet in the 12 months before study baseline. Due to heterogeneity of survey data between studies, we characterized intake using frequency of consumption. To generate dietary HLI components, we included food items in common across the LACE, Pathways, and CHI cohorts ( Table 2 ). In the analytic dataset (N=4,754), 76% of women had complete data for the food items in common, 15% were missing data on one item, 6% were missing data on two or three items, and 3% were missing data on more than four items. We included women who were missing 33% of data on food items in common across the three studies. Missing values for individual food items were imputed using Fully Conditional Specification (FCS) with SAS PROC MI within each cohort, resulting in a single imputed dataset. Individual food items were combined to create the F V, red meat, and sweets food groups ( Table 2 ). The final dietary measures included cohort-specific tertiles for frequency of consumption of F V and red meat, and cut points at 0, 1, and 1 times per day for sweets ( Table 1 ). Physical activity Women from the LACE and Pathways Studies responded to a physical activity questionnaire (PAQ) adapted from the Arizona Activity Frequency Questionnaire (AAFQ) ( 34 ). They responded to questions on frequency, duration, and intensity (change in heart rate and breathing) for approximately 50 different household and recreational activities. Women from the CHI Study were asked a total of 4 questions on physical activity: how many hours per week they spent performing strenuous activities, moderate activities, standing or walking at home, and standing or walking outside the home. Women from the Pathways Study were asked to report activity in the 6 months before baseline, while women from the LACE and CHI Studies were asked to report activity for the 12 months before baseline. Physical activity was measured as ‘hours per week of moderate or strenuous activity’. For the LACE and Pathways Studies, all activities for which women reported a ‘moderate’ or ‘large’ increase in heart rate and breathing were included. For the CHI Study, the hours per week reported in the two questions on strenuous and moderate activities were included. Cohort-specific tertiles of average weekly hours of moderate or strenuous physical activity was used as the final measure. Alcohol and Smoking All 3 cohorts collected data on alcohol consumption including frequency and serving size. The LACE FHCRC-FFQ contained 3 questions on beer, wine, and liquor. The Pathways Block FFQ contained 5 questions on beer, red wine, white wine, wine coolers, and liquor. The CHI questionnaire contained 4 questions on beer, liquor, red wine, and a question combining white/pink/rose wine, champagne, sake, and soju. Grams per day of alcohol consumption was calculated using frequency and serving size data. Women were categorized into 3 groups of average alcohol use: 0, ≤14 grams (1 drink), or 14 grams per day. Data on current and former smoking were available across all 3 cohorts. Questionnaires for all 3 cohorts asked women whether they smoked at least 100 cigarettes in their lifetime, and whether they currently smoke. Women were categorized into never, former, or current smokers. Other covariates Information on race and ethnicity, age, education, and income were self-reported at baseline. Race and ethnicity were categorized as non-Hispanic White (NHW), Hispanic, and Asian American (‘Asian’). Additionally, in women of the Pathways and CHI Studies for whom data were available, we examined associations within ethnic subgroups with the highest representation in the ENCLAVE cohort, specifically Chinese American (‘Chinese’), Filipina American (‘Filipina’), Mexican American (‘Mexican’), and unknown/other women. Statistical Analysis Descriptive characteristics of the study sample (N=4,754) were presented for the overall cohort, by nativity, and by nativity and race and ethnicity. We used the Pearson’s chi-square test of independence to test for heterogeneity of baseline characteristics in categorical variables. For continuous variables, we used a two-tailed t-test to test for heterogeneity by nativity, and analysis of variance (ANOVA) to test for heterogeneity by nativity and race and ethnicity. Main analyses Statistical analyses were performed using SAS 9.4 (RRID:SCR_008567). Log-binomial models were used to calculate crude and adjusted prevalence ratios (PRs) for the highest tertile of healthy lifestyle index (HLI) score representing the most optimal lifestyles. Models were adjusted for age at diagnosis, education, income, and race and ethnicity. We examined associations of nativity with HLI overall and stratified by race and ethnicity (Asian, Hispanic, NHW). In women from Pathways and CHI for whom data were available, we additionally stratified by ethnic subgroups (Chinese, Filipina, Mexican, NHW, unknown/other). Furthermore, we used log-binomial models to calculate crude and adjusted PRs for the healthiest category of each component of the HLI, overall and stratified by race and ethnicity (Asian, Hispanic, NHW). In both analyses, we performed a likelihood ratio test (LRT) for interaction between nativity and race and ethnicity cross-product terms to assess effect modification in adjusted models. We computed the Q-statistic to test for study heterogeneity by cohort for main effects associations in the adjusted models. We found no evidence for heterogeneity and therefore reported findings for the pooled cohort. Data Availability The data generated in this study contains protected health information and therefore are not publicly available. The data are available upon request from the Pathways Study team ( Larry.Kushi@kp.org ), CHI Study team ( Scarlett.Gomez@ucsf.edu ), and the LACE Study and ENCLAVE Study teams ( Candyce.H.Kroenke@kp.org ). Results In the pooled cohort, mean age at diagnosis was 59.3 years. Foreign-born women (mean=56.1 years) were generally younger than US-born women (mean=60.2 years) ( Table 3 ). This pattern was consistent across Asian and Hispanic women. However, foreign-born NHW women (mean=61.8 years) were slightly older than US-born NHW women (mean=60.8 years). In the overall cohort, foreign-born women were more likely to be in the lowest income tertile compared to US-born women. This trend was observed among foreign-born Hispanic and NHW women, whereas foreign-born Asian women were more likely to be in the highest income tertile. Additionally, foreign-born women were more likely than US-born women to be in the lowest category of education, consistent across racial/ethnic groups. Main effect associations of nativity and HLI overall and by race and ethnicity Overall, foreign-born women were more likely than US-born women to have a healthy lifestyle (PR=1.44 for the highest (optimal) HLI tertile, 95% CI: 1.31–1.59) ( Table 4 ). In models stratified by race and ethnicity, associations were consistent with the overall, with stronger associations between foreign-born nativity and highest HLI tertile in Hispanic (PR =1.76, 95% CI: 1.39–2.24) and Asian (PR =1.60, 95% CI: 1.32–1.94) women relative to NHW women (PR =1.26, 95% CI: 1.08–1.47) (p-interaction=0.03) ( Table 5 ). Associations with high HLI were nearly identical when Asian-specific BMI cut points were incorporated into the score ( Tables 4 , 5 ). In models stratified by ethnic subgroups, associations were consistent with the overall results ( Supplementary Table S1 ). However, we did not observe significant effect modification (p-interaction=0.13) though we also had lower power to detect differences. Main effect associations of nativity and HLI components Foreign-born women exhibited a higher prevalence of the most optimal behaviors for each HLI component compared to US-born women ( Table 4 ). In adjusted models, foreign-born women were more likely than US-born women to have waist circumference 31.5 inches (PR =1.19, 95% CI: 1.03–1.37), have normal BMI (PR =1.23, 95% CI: 1.11–1.37), never smoke (PR =1.11, 95% CI: 1.06–1.17), not consume sweets (PR =1.44, 95% CI: 1.21–1.70), consume less red meat (PR =1.46, 95% CI: 1.33–1.60), and consume more F V (PR =1.46, 95% CI: 1.32–1.62) ( Table 4 ). In unadjusted models, foreign-born women were more likely not to consume alcohol (PR =1.50, 95% CI: 1.41–1.59) and less likely to have high levels of physical activity (PR =0.79, 95% CI: 0.71–0.88); however, results were not statistically significant in the adjusted models ( Table 4 ). Associations of nativity with alcohol consumption, smoking, sweets consumption, waist circumference, and red meat consumption differed by race and ethnicity ( Table 5 ). In Asian and Hispanic women, those who were foreign-born were more likely to not drink alcohol (Asian: PR=1.09, 95% CI: 1.01–1.19; Hispanic: PR=1.19, 95% CI: 1.07–1.31), never have smoked (Asian: PR=1.16, 95% CI: 1.06–1.26; Hispanic: PR=1.22, 95% CI: 1.10–1.36), and not consume sweets (Asian: PR=1.99, 95% CI: 1.36–2.93; Hispanic: PR=1.94, 95% CI: 1.38–2.73) while no significant associations were observed in NHW women (all p-interactions 0.01). In NHW women, foreign-born were more likely to have a waist circumference 31.5 inches (PR=1.39, 95% CI: 1.17–1.66) while associations in Asian and Hispanic women were non-significant (p-interaction=0.01). In Asian women (PR=2.01, 95% CI: 1.54–2.63), those who were foreign-born were more likely to have low red meat consumption compared with associations in Hispanic (PR=1.60, 95% CI: 1.28–2.01) and NHW women (PR=1.30, 95% CI: 1.14–1.48) (p-interaction 0.01). Associations for nativity and BMI, physical activity, and F V consumption did not differ by race and ethnicity. Discussion In a large cohort of women diagnosed with breast cancer (BC), consistent with our hypotheses, foreign-born women were more likely to have a healthy lifestyle than US-born women as measured by the WCRF/AICR healthy lifestyle index (HLI) score. Also consistent, associations differed by race and ethnicity (Asian, Hispanic, and Non-Hispanic White (NHW)) with the strongest effects of foreign-born nativity and HLI observed in Asian and Hispanic women. Regarding HLI components, foreign-born women were more likely to have a healthy waist circumference and BMI, be never smokers, not consume sweets, consume less red meat, and consume more F V. The association of nativity with waist circumference 31.5 inches was strongest in NHW women, while associations with never smoking, no alcohol, no sweets, and low red meat consumption were strongest in Asian and Hispanic women. To our knowledge, this is the first study to evaluate associations of nativity with an overall lifestyle index in BC survivors, and the largest study of nativity and health behaviors in Hispanic and Asian BC survivors. Additionally, it is one of the few studies evaluating health behaviors in foreign-born NHW women. In our study, the stronger associations of nativity with overall healthy lifestyle in Asian and Hispanic women can be partly explained by lower alcohol consumption and higher tobacco abstinence among foreign-born women of these groups. This is consistent with Uong et al.’s findings that foreign-born women with BC were less likely to be current smokers and smoked fewer pack-years than US-born women with BC ( 24 ). Similarly, we found that foreign-born Hispanic, and additionally Asian, women were more likely to have never smoked. These findings are consistent with broader trends observed in general populations, where foreign-born individuals tend to have lower smoking rates ( 24 , 35 – 39 ) and alcohol consumption ( 35 , 38 , 40 – 43 ). Traditionally, women in Asian and Spanish-speaking countries faced societal restrictions around smoking ( 44 – 46 ) and drinking alcohol ( 46 , 47 ), in contrast to the more permissive cultural attitudes towards tobacco and alcohol use in women in the US, making these findings unsurprising. The consistency in associations of foreign-born nativity and high HLI across all three race and ethnic groups was influenced by associations of nativity with aspects of diet. Consistent with Santiago-Torres et al., we found that foreign-born Hispanic women with BC had higher diet quality, consuming less sweets and red meat, and more F V than US-born Hispanic women with BC ( 23 ). These findings align with those in general Hispanic populations, where foreign-born individuals consume more F V ( 48 – 51 ), fewer desserts ( 49 ) and sugar-sweetened beverages ( 52 ), and either similar ( 49 ) or reduced ( 48 , 51 ) meat intake. Likewise, research in general Asian populations suggests that foreign-born individuals consume similar ( 53 ) or greater ( 48 , 54 , 55 ) amounts of F V, comparable levels of added sugar ( 53 , 54 ), and less red and processed meat ( 48 , 53 , 54 ) than their US-born counterparts. In the only study that evaluated effects of nativity in NHW individuals, foreign-born Polish women ate more F V, and comparable amounts of sweets and meat compared to US-born Polish women ( 56 ). Though studies are limited in number, our results are generally consistent with prior findings. Physical activity is the one lifestyle behavior where US-born women in our study exhibited healthier behaviors than foreign-born women, particularly in Hispanic women. This pattern has also been observed in general populations, where foreign-born individuals tend to have lower levels of physical activity than those who are US-born ( 35 , 43 , 49 , 57 – 63 ). Foreign-born Asian and Hispanic women, in particular, have reported deprioritizing physical activity due to familial obligations, work, and household duties ( 64 – 66 ). Additionally, the unfamiliarity of how to be physically active in a new country of residence and fear of embarrassment have also been cited as barriers to becoming physically active ( 58 ). For the US-born Asian and Hispanic women, evolving social norms and greater exposure to information about physical activity could explain their higher activity levels. Similarly, foreign-born NHW women may face fewer barriers to physical activity, as the promotion of active lifestyles in the US and other Western countries through government and organizational initiatives may lead to activity levels similar to those of US-born women. Foreign-born nativity was related to both optimal waist circumference ( 31.5 inches) and BMI (18.5- 25 kg/m 2 ) only in NHW women. Similar levels of physical activity in foreign-born and US-born NHW women, combined with a relatively healthier diet among foreign-born NHW women, might help to explain these findings. Contrary to Santiago-Torres et al.’s findings, which reported lower BMI and smaller waist and hip circumferences in foreign-born Latina women with BC, we found no significant associations for BMI or waist circumference for the Hispanic women in our study ( 23 ). To align with Santiago-Torres et al.’s methods ( 23 ), we conducted a sensitivity analysis in the Hispanic women in our sample, evaluating mean waist circumference and BMI by nativity, but found no statistically significant differences. Prior research in general populations have reported that foreign-born individuals had lower BMI ( 43 , 62 , 67 – 70 ) and waist circumference ( 68 ) than US-born individuals. Interestingly, one study found that lower education, female sex, and Hispanic ethnicity were associated with greater increases in BMI over time among foreign-born individuals ( 69 ). The Hispanic women in our sample tended to have lower levels of education, this may help to explain why we did not observe any differences in waist circumference or BMI by nativity. In the Asian women in our study, foreign-born nativity was associated with an optimal BMI when either universal or Asian-specific (though nonsignificant) BMI cut points were used, but no association was observed for waist circumference. This observation has been described in previous research as ‘thin fat obesity’ which is prevalent in Asian countries, where individuals may have a normal BMI but also exhibit a high body fat percentage, often measured using waist circumference ( 71 ). Study strengths include a large, pooled cohort of female BC survivors, many of whom are immigrants, with detailed measures on a variety of health behaviors. We had sufficient power to assess associations with individual lifestyle behaviors across racial/ethnic groups. While we did not exactly match the Shams-White operationalization of the WCRF/AICR recommendations, we were able to consider 6 of the 7 recommendations and additionally incorporate smoking data, important given the known adverse effects of smoking on BC survival ( 24 ). The data harmonization process, which involved combining datasets from multiple studies, introduced the potential for bias due to differences in data collection methods and participant characteristics across studies. One notable difference is that the LACE survey was only administered in English, which may contribute to concerns about selection bias. Additionally, the studies were conducted in different post-diagnosis periods, which posed a potential risk of bias, as behaviors like diet and physical activity could change over time. Despite these differences, our meta-analysis showed no statistical differences by cohort in associations of interest, suggesting that methodological differences across study cohorts did not significantly impact overall findings. We also note that we had limited data available across all three studies to evaluate the recommendation to limit consumption of red and processed meats. Our measurement included just hamburger or ground beef consumption, the only measure of red or processed meat available in the CHI Study. However, this measure was strongly positively correlated with overall red and processed meat intake in the Pathways and LACE Studies which had extensive data (Pearson correlation coefficient = 0.65, p 0.001), and associations were qualitatively similar using both measures, suggesting our measure was a good indicator of overall intake. Because our study included self-reported measures for weight, height, waist circumference, physical activity, and diet, we considered that measurement error might bias our results. A common source of bias in self-reported measures is social desirability bias, where participants tend to underreport perceived negative behaviors and overreport perceived positive behaviors ( 72 – 74 ). This type of bias would likely skew estimates toward the null, suggesting that the true associations may be stronger than what we observed. We noted little evidence that a diagnosis of BC altered associations of nativity and lifestyle compared with associations in the general population suggesting that early life factors may be more important than a BC diagnosis in shaping lifestyle. However, our study did not consider the role of acculturation which may lead to the adoption of less healthy lifestyle behaviors over time. Future studies should investigate the influence of acculturation and other environmental factors on health behaviors in the context of BC. In conclusion, in a large cohort of female BC survivors, foreign-born women tend to exhibit healthier lifestyles and behaviors than US-born women as measured by the WCRF/AICR recommendations and healthy lifestyle index (HLI) score. Closer adherence to recommendations in foreign-born women in this study may bode well for cancer prevention and survivorship in those women. Supplementary Material 1