Introduction Circulating levels of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) have been consistently observed in epidemiologic studies to be associated with premenopausal breast cancer, but not postmenopausal breast cancer. For example, a meta-analysis of six case–control studies estimated a statistically significant 93% increased risk of premenopausal breast cancer associated with the highest levels of IGF-1, while no increased risk of postmenopausal breast cancer was observed across five studies [ 1 ]. A more recent meta-analysis of the evidence from 96 studies across several cancer types, including breast cancer, similarly concluded that higher circulating levels of IGF-1 were associated with increased risk of premenopausal breast cancer [ 2 ]. IGF binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3) binds 75% of IGF-1 and was initially thought to be inversely associated with breast cancer given its potential to block IGF-1 activity [ 1 ]. However, findings synthesized across case–control studies demonstrated a statistically significant 96% increased risk of premenopausal breast cancer associated with higher levels of IGFBP-3, but no association with postmenopausal breast cancer [ 1 ]. Most previous epidemiologic studies of IGF-1 and breast cancer were conducted in Caucasian women, including case–control studies nested in cohorts from the U.S. [ 3 – 7 ], Norway [ 8 ], Italy[ 9 ], and other European countries [ 10 ], in addition to retrospective case–control studies from Canada [ 11 ], China [ 12 ], and Spain[ 13 ]. However, there is substantial ethnic variation in IGF-1 levels, and little is known about differences in IGF-associated breast cancer risks across ethnicities. For example, U.S. Hispanic women have lower levels of IGF-1 than non-Hispanic White women in the Multiethnic Cohort Study [ 14 ] and the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey [ 15 ]. If these lower IGF-1 levels translate to reduced breast cancer risk, then ethnic differences in IGF-1 may partially explain the reduced incidence of breast cancer in Hispanic women compared to non-Hispanic white women [ 16 ]. No epidemiologic studies have been able to adequately assess the relationship among IGF-1, IGFBP-3, and breast cancer in Hispanic women. We investigated the association among IGF-1, IGFBP-3, and breast cancer risk in a subset of participants of a population-based case–control study of women living in Arizona (AZ), New Mexico (NM), Colorado (CO), and Utah (UT), the 4 Corners Breast Cancer Study. Our previous analysis of the control group of this study population demonstrated ethnic differences in genetic and lifestyle factors that affect circulating IGF-I and IGFBP-3 levels [ 17 – 19 ]. Here, we report on the case–control findings of the 4 Corners Breast Cancer Study, examining the risk of breast cancer associated with IGF-I and IGFBP-3 levels in Hispanic and non-Hispanic White women. Materials and methods Study design population The current case–control analysis was conducted among a subset of participants in a larger, population-based case–control study of breast cancer. The parent study, the 4 Corners Breast Cancer Study, was conducted among women living in Colorado (CO), New Mexico (NM), Utah (UT), and Arizona (AZ), the details of which have been previously described [ 18 , 20 ]. Briefly, women who were diagnosed with histologically confirmed breast cancer between October 1999 and May 2004 at ages 25–79 years were identified through state cancer registries using ICD-9 codes C50.0–50.6 and C50.8–50.9. Both in situ and invasive cases were included. Clinical characteristics of the cases were obtained from the state cancer registries, including stage at diagnosis and hormone receptor status of the tumor when available. Population-based controls were frequency-matched on age and ethnicity and were selected from either driver’s license records (NM and UT) or commercial mailing lists (AZ and CO) for women ages 65, and lists of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services for women ages 65 and older (all four states). Of all the women contacted, 68% of cases and 42% of controls participated, resulting in a sample size of 2,325 cases and 2,525 controls. Participants and nonparticipants had similar community socioeconomic characteristics [ 21 ]. Written informed consent was obtained from all study participants. The study protocol was approved by the institutional review board at each institution. Data and sample collection Information on medical and reproductive histories, lifestyle factors, and family history of cancer was obtained using a computerized questionnaire administered in-person by a trained interviewer. Venipuncture was performed in the study participants’ homes, and blood was obtained using either a fasting or non-fasting protocol. For the current case–control analysis of IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 levels, only those whose blood was obtained using the fasting protocol were included ( n = 184 cases and 522 controls). Women were eligible for the fasting protocol if they had never taken chemotherapy, were not currently taking tamoxifen, were not currently pregnant and had not been diagnosed with diabetes. After collection, blood was centrifuged for 15 min and serum was aliquotted and stored until shipment to the laboratory. Exposure assessment Serum IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 levels were measured at the Maine Center for Osteoporosis Research as previously described [ 17 ]. Briefly, serum IGF-1 levels were determined using the IGF-1 (IGFPB-3 blocked) radioimmunoassay (American Laboratory Products Company (ALPCO) Windham, NH). IGFBP-3 levels were ascertained using the “Active” IGFBP-3 IRMA kit (Diagnostic Systems Laboratories, Inc., Webster, Texas) which directly measures non-glycosylated IGFBP-3. All samples were tested in replicate, and the coefficient of variation ranged from 0.06 to 6.5% for IGF-1 and 0.17–7.5% for IGFBP-3. Statistical methods Demographic characteristics and breast cancer risk factors were compared between breast cancer cases and controls using the χ 2 test for categorical data, χ 2 test for trend for ordered categories, and Wilcoxon rank test for continuous variables. Mean and standard deviations for IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 levels were calculated and compared across different categories of demographic and breast cancer risk factors using the Wilcoxon rank test for two-category variables and the Kruskal–Wallis test for multiple-category variables; this analysis was conducted separately for breast cancer cases and controls. Associations with height and total calories were examined for IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 using Spearman’s correlation coefficient. Quartiles of IGF-1, IGFBP-3, and IGF-1/IGFBP-3 were defined based on the distributions in the total control population ( n = 522). Associations among quartiles of IGF-1, IGFBP-3, and breast cancer were estimated by calculating odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) using logistic regression. In order to examine the statistical significance of trends, logistic regression was used to calculate P values associated with log-transformed IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 levels modeled as continuous variables. Potential confounders of the association among IGF-1, IGFBP-3, and breast cancer were assessed among the controls as follows: Linear regression models were examined, using the log of IGF-1 or IGFBP-3 as the dependent variables, and the following variables as independent variables: age, study site, ethnicity, education, menopausal status, age at menarche, parity, age at first pregnancy, HRT use, BMI at age 15, BMI in reference year, family history of breast cancer, height, total energy expenditure, total calorie intake, log of cholesterol intake, carbohydrate intake, sucrose intake, and fiber intake. Models were constructed for all women, pre-versus postmenopausal women (in which case menopausal status was excluded from the models), and NHW versus Hispanic women (in which case ethnicity was excluded from the models). Factors that were associated with IGF-1 and/or IGFBP-3 at a significance level of P 0.05 in any of the five groups of women described above were included as adjustment factors in all case–control multivariable analyses; these included age, ethnicity, education, recent HRT use, BMI in reference year, parity, total energy expenditure, total calorie intake, and total cholesterol intake. While not significantly associated with IGF-1 or IGFBP-3 in any of the models, study center was also included to control for potential differences across study sites. The logistic regression models described above were investigated in all women combined, as well as in pre versus postmenopausal women and Hispanic versus NHW women. In order to tease apart effects of menopausal status and ethnicity, results were stratified by both factors simultaneously. Due to the small sample size of this particular analysis, levels of IGF-1, IGFBP-3, and the ratio between the two were treated as continuous variables in the logistic regression models with adjustment for only age and study center. Results Characteristics of the breast cancer cases and controls are presented in Table 1 . Of the 184 cases and 522 controls who participated in the 4 Corners Breast Cancer Study and provided fasting blood samples, 40% were of Hispanic ethnicity, including 30% of cases and 43% of controls ( P = 0.001). Statistically significant differences between cases and controls were observed for body mass index (BMI) and height, with cases tending to be slightly taller and having a lower BMI than controls. Cases also tended to have fewer numbers of full-term pregnancies and consume more calories than controls, although neither of these differences were statistically significant. Mean levels of IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 are presented by demographic and breast cancer risk factors separately among cases and controls in Table 2 . Levels of IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 significantly decreased with age in cases and controls and were lower among postmenopausal compared to premenopausal women. Hispanic women had lower levels of IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 compared to NHW women among both the cases and the controls, although the differences were only statistically significant for levels of IGFBP-3. Higher education was associated with increased levels of both IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 in cases and controls. Greater numbers of full-term pregnancies were associated with decreased levels of both IGF-1 and IGFBP-3, but only among the controls. Increased BMI was associated with decreased IGF-1 in both cases and controls. IGFBP-3 levels did not differ by BMI in controls, although IGFBP-3 tended to decrease with increasing BMI in cases ( P = 0.08). Statistically significant positive correlations with height were observed for IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 in cases and controls. Associations among quartiles of IGF-1, IGFBP-3, and pre- versus postmenopausal breast cancer are presented in Table 3 . The highest quartile of IGF-1 was associated with a statistically significant increased risk of breast cancer overall (OR = 1.92, 95% CI = 1.07–3.43) after adjustment for age, study center, ethnicity, education, recent hormone exposure, BMI, parity, total energy expenditure, total calories, and cholesterol levels. The association with IGF-1 levels was observed for both premenopausal and postmenopausal breast cancer, although only the association with postmenopausal breast cancer reached statistical significance (OR = 2.09, 95% CI = 1.07–4.12). Statistically significant increased risks of breast cancer were also observed in relation to increased levels of IGFBP-3, with the highest quartile associated with a 6.5-fold risk of premenopausal breast cancer and a 2.8-fold risk of postmenopausal breast cancer. No associations were observed between the IGF-1/IGFBP-3 ratio and either pre or postmenopausal breast cancer. The associations among IGF-1, IGFBP-3, the IGF-1/IGFBP-3 ratio, and breast cancer are stratified by ethnicity in Table 4 . Breast cancer was associated with increasing levels of both IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 among NHW women ( P for trend = 0.01 for IGF-1 and 0.02 for IGFBP-3). In contrast, IGF-1 levels were not associated with increased risk of breast cancer among Hispanic women. Breast cancer risk tended to increase with increasing IGFBP-3 among Hispanics, but this trend was not statistically significant ( P = 0.44). Tests for interaction by ethnicity were not statistically significant for either IGF-1 ( P = 0.19) or IGFBP-3 ( P = 0.43). When the IGF-1/IGFBP-3 ratio was examined, there was a non-significant positive trend between increasing levels of the ratio and breast cancer among NHW women ( P = 0.11). Breast cancer risk was not associated with higher levels of the IGF-1/IGFBP-3 ratio among Hispanics. The associations among IGF-1, IGFBP-3, the IGF-1/IGFBP-3 ratio, and breast cancer were examined after simultaneous stratification by menopausal status and ethnicity. No statistically significant associations between IGF-1 or IGFBP-3 levels and breast cancer were observed for premenopausal or postmenopausal Hispanic women, although sample sizes were limited for these analyses (data not shown). Among NHW women, IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 levels were higher among cases compared to controls, and these differences reached statistical significance in postmenopausal women. When recent hormone use was considered, the associations among IGF-1, IGFBP-3, and postmenopausal breast cancer in NHW women were confined to those who used HRT 6–24 months prior to study enrollment (data not shown). Discussion This is the first report of IGF-1 and breast cancer among Hispanic women. Overall, there was no association between IGF-1 and breast cancer among Hispanic women, while increased levels of IGF-1 were associated with premenopausal and postmenopausal breast cancer in NHW women. Higher levels of IGFBP-3 were associated with increased risks of breast cancer in both Hispanic and NHW women, although the associations were statistically significant for NHW women only. The current findings among NHW women are consistent with previous studies of premenopausal breast cancer conducted among mostly Caucasian women that observed positive associations with increased IGF-I levels [ 3 , 4 , 6 , 9 , 11 , 13 ] and IGFBP-3 levels [ 4 , 9 – 11 ]. However, the increased risk of postmenopausal breast cancer associated with high levels of IGF-1 observed in the present study is not consistent with most previous studies [ 1 , 5 , 10 ]. A recent case-cohort analysis conducted within the Women’s Health Initiative Observational Study (WHI-OS) observed increased risks of postmenopausal breast cancer associated with higher levels of insulin, after adjustment for free IGF-I, estradiol, BMI, and other factors, while no significant increased breast cancer risks were independently associated with IGF-I levels [ 7 ]. Furthermore, BMI was shown to be positively associated with insulin and estradiol levels [ 7 ]. In the current study population, Hispanic women tended to have higher BMI than NHW women, and IGF-I levels were inversely associated with BMI. Therefore, the lack of association between IGF-I and breast cancer observed among Hispanic women in the current study population could have resulted from negative confounding by unmeasured insulin or estradiol levels. Other possible reasons for inconsistencies in findings across published studies have been noted by researchers, such as differences in laboratory assays, environmental and dietary exposures, and study populations [ 22 ], including differences in stage at diagnosis and hormonal profiles. For example, a previous case–control study of premenopausal women observed an increased risk of DCIS associated with higher levels of IGF-1 [ 23 ]. In addition, higher IGF-I levels measured in breast tumor tissues have been associated with increased differentiation, suggesting that IGF-1 may be important for earlier stage disease [ 24 ]. Hispanic women are diagnosed with breast cancer at later stages than White women, with a greater proportion of Hispanic women having ER-/PR-cancers than White women [ 25 – 27 ]. If IGF-1 is important for the development of less aggressive disease and/or ER+/PR+ disease, then this may partially explain why higher IGF-1 levels are associated with breast cancer in NHW women but not Hispanic women. The cases and controls included in the present analysis represent a subset of the parent study, due to the selection criteria for obtaining fasting blood samples (i.e., had never taken chemotherapy, not currently taking tamoxifen, not currently pregnant, and had never been diagnosed with diabetes). As a result, there were systematic differences between the cases included in the study and those that did not contribute fasting blood samples, which limited our ability to study associations with more advanced disease. Specifically, of the 184 cases included, 50 and 38% were diagnosed at stage 0 (i.e., ductal carcinoma in situ [DCIS]) and stage 1, respectively, compared to 14 and 51% of 2,141 cases not included in the present analysis ( P 0.0001). Although there was no difference in the association between IGF-1 and breast cancer diagnosed at stage 0 versus 1 (data not shown), associations with more advanced disease could not be investigated. Hormone receptor status was not routinely characterized for DCIS during 1999–2004, and therefore, information on estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) status was not available for the DCIS cases in the current study, thus limiting the investigation of IGF-1 levels and breast cancer with different hormone receptor profiles. In summary, the association between IGF-1 and breast cancer differed by ethnicity, while no ethnic differences were observed in IGFBP-3-associated breast cancer. Future research is needed to clarify these differences in IGF-1-associated breast cancer with larger sample sizes so that prevention efforts can be appropriately targeted to the populations at highest risk.