Introduction Mammographic imaging is a valuable tool for understanding breast cancer, not only because it allows for earlier cancer detection, but also because it provides a view of the breast’s physical structures, via differences in x-ray attenuation for different tissue types. Breast composition, defined as the relative abundance and structural organization of glandular epithelium, connective tissues, fat, and water, is associated with breast cancer risk and can be measured readily from mammograms.( 1 , 2 ) Breast composition has been shown to vary with other breast cancer risk factors and to change in response to chemopreventive interventions.( 2 – 4 ) Approximately 70% of women aged 40 years or older received a mammogram within the past two years,( 5 ) making mammograms an accessible and potentially powerful tool for characterizing breast cancer risk profiles via analysis of breast composition. The most commonly studied breast composition measure is breast density, which is defined as the ratio of dense tissue to total tissue in the breast. However, as a simple ratio breast density lacks the ability to capture within-breast heterogeneity that may define more complex breast composition patterns.( 6 ) Mammographic parenchymal texture features are a set of measures that complement the information provided by breast density by quantifying patterns of relative tissue density on a pixel-by-pixel basis.( 7 ) Features range from pixel density distributions to higher order statistics describing spatial and structural patterns.( 7 ) Some individual parenchymal texture features, notably fractal dimension, run length, and co-occurrence features, are statistically significant predictors of invasive breast cancer risk,( 6 – 10 ) but the mechanisms underlying these relationships are unclear. Prior studies have reported weak to moderate texture features associations with age and BMI, and intermediate associations with percent breast density and menopausal status.( 9 , 11 – 14 ) However, the number of studies that have investigated these relationships is limited. Further, early work was conducted using screen-film mammograms, and may not be generalizable to the digital breast images that are that standard today. To refine our understanding of what parenchymal texture features may reflect, we evaluated associations between texture features and established breast cancer risk factors in a contemporary population of postmenopausal women participating in breast cancer screening. In addition, we examined the association between the texture features and mammogram acquisition characteristics to understand how differences in technical procedures may affect feature values. By putting the texture feature values in context, these data will help us understand which biological pathways texture features are related to and how these features might clarify breast cancer etiology. Materials and Methods Study Population This study used data from a study of the relationship between circulating estrogens and breast composition. Postmenopausal women who were scheduled for a breast cancer screening mammogram were recruited prospectively at one of four imaging facilities in the University of North Carolina Health system between October 2020 and July 2022. Eligible women were ≥ 45 years old, postmenopausal, had no prior history of breast cancer, and were not currently using chemopreventive medications, exogenous estrogens, or exogenous progestins. The study was limited to postmenopausal women due to the unknown impact of menstrual cycle hormonal fluctuations on texture feature variability. All participants provided written informed consent and written HIPAA approval. This study was conducted according to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Institutional Review Board (IRB #19–0793). Enrollment and Participant Characteristics Women scheduled for a screening mammogram were identified in the electronic health record appointment system and approached by research staff to determine their interest in participating in a study evaluating breast texture. Among 557 women who expressed an interest, 166 were determined to be ineligible because they had a menstrual period in the prior 12 months (n=61); were using hormonal medications (n=56); had a prior breast cancer (n=28); had breast implants (n=12); developed breast cancer within 12 months of study participation (n = 1); or other reasons detailed in Figure 1 . Eighty-one women who were eligible for the study elected not to participate on the day of their mammogram ( Figure 1 ). Due to the Covid-19 pandemic, women were initially contacted via telephone by a research assistant and provided electronic informed consent and HIPAA authorization materials to minimize in-person contact. Women who did not have email addresses signed the consent and HIPAA authorization forms on the day of their scheduled screening mammogram. After the pandemic-related hospital restrictions were lifted, women were approached by a research assistant using a mixture of telephone and in-person methods. A total of 309 women provided informed consent. Of these, four were excluded for the following reasons: did not undergo mammographic imaging after providing consent (n=1); only MLO views available (n=1); had mammographic imaging performed using a Hologic machine (n=1); mammograms not obtained for analysis (n=1), resulting in a final sample of 305 participants. Following informed consent, a questionnaire was administered by trained study staff to obtain details on recent exposures, including smoking, alcohol use, NSAID use, and non-hormonal medications to ease menopausal symptoms, as well as self-reported height and weight measures, which were used to calculate body mass index (BMI; kg/m 2 ). Additional information regarding participant age at the time of the mammogram, race, Hispanic ethnicity, and radiologist-assigned BI-RADS breast density was obtained from the electronic medical record. Parenchymal Texture Features All enrolled participants received a bilateral full-field digital screening mammogram with mediolateral (MLO) and craniocaudal (CC) views. Mammograms were obtained using GE Senographe Essential or GE Senographe Pristina machines. Parenchymal texture features were extracted from mammogram images using an automated pipeline that has been described previously.( 6 , 15 , 16 ) Briefly, features were extracted from the whole breast image using a lattice-based grid placed over the image with a rectangular window (size W and spacing D ) surrounding each lattice point. Window size was optimized in a feature extraction testing phase. Local texture feature values were extracted from each window and averaged to produce a single measure for the whole breast. Quantitative breast density was also measured as part of the pipeline.( 17 ) A total of 344 parenchymal texture features were measured ( Supplementary Table S1 ). Several quality control steps were carried out to identify images where texture features values may have been influenced by something other than breast composition ( i.e. , incorrect image segmentation, visible pacemaker, annotations, or other markings on the image, etc.). To identify potentially problematic images, we evaluated images with outlier values of breast dense breast area based on visual inspection of the distribution using a histogram. Images with dense area values ≥ 200 cm 2 were flagged for further review. Then, we examined within-person similarity between left and right breast images, under the assumption that in this non-cancer screening population both breasts should have a similar appearance. Left/right breast dense area ratios ≥ 7 were flagged for further review. We also evaluated the presence of outlier feature values in an image using two methods. First, in data normalized to a median of 0 and units of inter-quartile range, an outlier was defined as being 5 x IQR from the median value. Images with ≥ 25 outliers by this definition were flagged for further review. Second, in data normalized to a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1, we summed all feature values per image. Images with a sum value of 500 were flagged for further review. In total, images belonging to 48 study participants (16%) were flagged and all images for those patients were reviewed. We found that MLO views were more likely to have poor image segmentation. Therefore, the analysis was limited to CC views only. Four CC images with poor segmentation were also excluded from the analysis. Statistical Analysis To evaluate the impact of exam variability on texture features, we examined associations between technical factors related to mammogram acquisition and texture features by calculating the Pearson correlation (continuous factors) or Kruskal-Wallis test (categorical factors). The Bonferroni correction was applied prior to evaluating associations for statistical significance. We found that raw texture feature values were significantly associated with several mammogram acquisition factors, including the type of mammogram machine ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Such systematic variation has the potential to induce bias in our results, so the texture feature data was harmonized using Combat, a software program developed to mitigate batch effects in laboratory data.( 18 ) Combat uses two types of variables: covariates and batch. In our study, we defined batch as the mammogram machine used for the exam, identified by the machine serial number coded in the DICOM image header, and included no other covariates. Our rationale was that the machine was the only factor that was likely to introduce unwanted technical (non-biological) variation to the texture feature data. Other technical characteristics, such as compression force and x-ray dose are related to breast composition. Raw (pre-Combat) and Combat-harmonized texture feature data was normalized by calculating z-scores. In some instances, imaging was repeated due to an unsatisfactory view of the breast or axilla, resulting in multiple images for the same breast ( e.g. , two right breast CC images, etc.). In those cases, z-scored values for images belonging to the same breast were averaged. Following that, right and left values were averaged, resulting in a single z-score-based texture feature value representing the average value in both breasts. A Gaussian finite mixture model was fit to the top 26 principal components (90% of the texture feature variation), based on the z-score averaged texture features.( 19 – 21 ) Associations between texture feature group membership and participant characteristics were evaluated using ANOVA or the Kruskal Wallis test for continuous characteristics, and the chi-square test for categorical characteristics. Volcano plots were used to visualize the association between individual texture features and participant characteristics. To estimate multivariable effect estimates, we constructed a multinomial logistic regression analysis with texture feature group membership as the dependent variable. Independent variables included all characteristics shown in Table 1 . For participants reporting menopause due to surgery without the removal of both ovaries, we imputed time since menopause using the approach described by Rosner and Colditz.( 22 ) Explanatory value of the independent variables was evaluated using McFadden’s R 2 . Data analysis was conducted using R version 4.1.1 ( neuroCombat and mclust [RRID:SCR_027153]) and SAS version 9.4 (SAS, Cary, NC) [RRID:SCR_008567].( 23 , 24 ) Two-sided P-values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Figures were created using Python version 3.6 ( matplotlib [RRID:SCR_008624] and seaborn [RRID: SCR_018132]) or Microsoft Excel [RRID:SCR_016137].( 25 , 26 ) Data Availability The data generated in this study is not publicly available due to lack of patient consent for public data sharing, but is available upon reasonable request from the corresponding author. Results Characteristics of the 305 enrolled participants are shown in Table 1 . Seventy percent of the participants were White, 24% were Black, and 5% were another race. Only 4% of participants reported Hispanic ethnicity. The mean age was 64.7 years (range: 45 – 83 years). Twenty-nine percent of women were reported by a radiologist to have dense breasts. The mean body mass index (BMI) was 29.4 kg/m 2 (range 19.4 to 53.1 kg/m 2 ) and 77% of the women were parous. Prior to harmonization, 81% of texture features were associated with the mammogram machine used ( Figure 2 ). Co-occurrence/law’s mask hybrid features were over-represented among those features significantly associated with mammogram machine and structural pattern measures were under-represented ( Figure 2 ). Following harmonization, one feature remained associated with mammogram machine and was removed from further analysis ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Other mammogram acquisition factors that are dependent on breast tissue characteristics, such as breast size, thickness, and density, remained associated with texture features following harmonization as expected ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Texture feature clustering resulted in three groups, which ranged in size from 21 individuals to 159 individuals. Group 2 had a higher proportion of women who were younger, Black, had a higher BMI, and had less time pass since the start of menopause when compared with women in groups 1 and 3 ( Tables 1 and 2 ). The groups also differed according to breast density measures, with group 2 trending towards lower breast density and group 3 trending towards higher breast density according to both radiologists’ BI-RADS assessment and the computer-based quantification of percent breast density. Women in group 2 were significantly less likely to fall into the highest tertile of dense breast area, indicating a lower breast density independent of the higher BMI within this group. Ethnicity, type of menopause, parity, age at first birth, and family history of breast cancer did not differ among the groups (all P 0.05, Table 1 ). When we evaluated the contributions of individual features ( Figure 3 ), multiple features showed statistically significant associations with race ( Figure 3B ), obesity ( Figure 3C ), BI-RADS breast density ( Figure 3E ), and percent density ( Figure 3F ) after adjustment for multiple comparisons. A majority of these features belonged to the structural pattern measures, which characterize spatial relationships between pixels, and co-occurrence/Law’s mask hybrid features, which measure statistical relationships between pixels after filtering the image through convolutional masks ( Figure 3 ).( 10 ) In contrast, there were relatively few associations between individual features and age ( Figure 3A ) or time since menopause ( Figure 3D ), despite the associations of these variables with principal components-determined texture feature groups. In the multivariable-adjusted model, the McFadden’s R 2 value was 0.32, suggesting that 68% of variability in texture feature group membership was not explained by the variables we evaluated. Type of menopause, breast area and breast thickness were significantly different between texture feature groups 1 and 2 after adjustment for other factors, whereas BMI, time since menopause, and breast thickness were significantly different between groups 3 and 2 after adjustment for other factors ( Table 3 ). Discussion Breast parenchymal texture encompasses a range of spatial and structural features that can be measured from a mammogram and reflect the underlying breast composition. Historically estimated visually by a radiologist, newer computer-based approaches allow for automated, reproducible measurements that have the potential to detect finer gradients in breast cancer risk when compared to qualitative scales.( 3 ) Quantitative parenchymal texture features are independent predictors of breast cancer risk,( 7 ) but relatively little is known about the relationship between parenchymal texture features and other breast cancer risk factors. In this study, we evaluated characteristics associated with 344 texture features in a population of postmenopausal women attending routine breast cancer screening. We found that the information in the 344 features could be distilled into 3 texture feature groups. The texture features were statistically significantly associated with age, race, BMI, and time since menopause, and breast composition measures, including BI-RADS breast density, percent breast density, and absolute dense breast area. However, independent associations were limited to factors related to body composition and menopause and 68% of model variation was unexplained by the predictors we evaluated, which are representative of information typically available in the medical record. This is consistent with prior findings that parenchymal texture is an independent breast cancer risk factor and contains unique information that is complementary to traditional breast cancer risk factors.( 7 ) Data on the relationships between epidemiologic breast cancer risk factors and parenchymal texture features are limited. To our knowledge, relationships between parenchymal texture and race and time since menopause have not been evaluated in detail. We found that both factors differed significantly among texture feature groups. The association with time since menopause is consistent with earlier reports that parenchymal texture was associated with menopausal status suggesting that, similar to breast density, parenchymal texture is sensitive to large reductions in estrogen levels.( 13 , 14 ) A majority of existing published research lacks information for women from under-represented racial groups, including Black women, who are more likely to be diagnosed with advanced breast cancer and/or die of breast cancer.( 27 , 28 ) Most studies reporting on mammographic parenchymal texture did not describe the racial or ethnic background of the populations studied,( 11 , 12 , 14 , 29 ) with the exception of Daye et al.( 13 ) which included 12% Black, 2% Asian, and 1% mixed race women in the study population. In this study, the highest proportion of Black women was in texture feature group 2. Group 2 was also characterized by higher BMI and lower breast density, characteristics that have been associated with Black women in prior studies.( 30 – 34 ) While race is not expected to be a causal factor in determining parenchymal texture or its association with breast cancer risk, race is a social marker of other exposures and an identifier of populations that tend to have poorer health outcomes when compared with other racial groups. Existing national statistics show that Black women have a higher prevalence of obesity (56.9%) compared with women of other races (17.2% - 43.7%).( 35 ) The causes of racial differences in BMI are multifactorial. Lower breast density in a population with higher obesity is likely due to the fact that breast size increases with body size and obesity,( 36 ) thus for a given amount of dense tissue, a higher BMI will result in a lower percent density estimate. Ensuring that women from diverse demographic backgrounds are represented in research is a way to ensure that all relevant exposure profiles are represented, and the resultant breast cancer risk information will be relevant to all women, including those at highest risk for poor breast cancer outcomes. An unexpected result was that, in this population, there was no association between texture feature group and family history of breast cancer. While one prior study similarly reported no association between mammographic parenchymal pattern and family history of breast cancer,( 29 ) results from other studies indicated that parenchymal texture was likely to have a heritable component. Liu et al.( 37 ) identified statistically significant associations between the texture feature grayscale variation and common genetic variants at three loci: 6q24.1, 8q24.22, and 12q22. Two of these loci (6q24.1 and 8q24.22) were not previously associated with breast density or breast cancer risk, whereas one (12q22) was previously associated with breast non-dense area, breast size, overall breast cancer risk, and ER-positive breast cancer risk. Parenchymal texture was also a significant predictor of BRCA 1/2 mutational status after adjustment for percent breast density, with AUC values between 0.7 and 0.9.( 38 , 39 ) Associations with age and BMI in our study support relationships that have been previously reported. Wei et al.( 29 ) reported weak, non-statistically significant correlations between their parenchymal texture measure and age and BMI. Wang et al.( 9 ) reported weak to moderate correlations between texture features and age and BMI. Liu et al.( 37 ) calculated a summary measure of whole-breast grayscale variation and found a positive correlation with breast dense area and percent density but an inverse correlation with BMI. In this study, there was no association between texture feature group and parity or age at first birth, which suggests that breast tissue remodeling associated with pregnancy and birth are not reflected permanently in texture features. This is consistent with the previously reported finding that parity was not associated with breast lobular involution.( 40 ) With only 4% of the women reporting Hispanic ethnicity, we were unable to draw any conclusions about the relationship between ethnicity and parenchymal texture. Investigations of relationships between texture features and breast cancer risk factors have mainly focused on associations with breast density, which is a ratio of the amount of breast fibroglandular tissue to total breast area. percent breast density and texture features representing Laws, Markovian, run length, wavelet, Fourier, power law, fractal dimension, regional skewness, gray level histogram and lacunarity features.( 11 – 13 ) Another study reported weak correlations between percent breast density and a composite measure that included gray scale and run length features.( 29 ) Additionally, moderate correlations have been reported between absolute dense tissue area and fractal dimension and lacunarity features and between volumetric percent density and gray-level histogram features.( 9 , 12 ) These data suggest that breast density does not correspond to any specific class of parenchymal texture features, which is consistent with the results observed in this study. Further, knowledge of the spatial and structural constructs that each feature class represents provides greater specificity as a breast composition measure in comparison to the global measure of breast density, which may prove more informative for understanding breast cancer risk. These results should be interpreted in the context of several limitations. First, the study included postmenopausal women only and it is unknown whether the associations we observed are also present among premenopausal women. Second, we used processed (“for presentation”) images. The range of texture feature variation may differ on raw (“for processing”) images and may yield different results. Additionally, the mammograms in this study were performed as part of routine care, and we had no influence on which mammography machine was used during their exam. Variation of radiomic features by imaging machine is a known problem, and Combat has been used successfully by others to control for these effects.( 41 – 43 ) In our data, the proportion of machine-associated features went from 81% to less than 1%, with the remaining machine-associated feature removed prior to analysis, allowing for analysis of texture features in a more broadly representative population that would be possible if limited to exams conducted on a single machine. Our analysis focused on 2-D mammograms, which were the dominant form of mammography offered at the facilities in our analysis at the time of recruitment, and it is unknown whether the relationships we observed are consistent when texture is measured from 3-D mammograms. Although 3-D mammography has become widely available over the past decade, 2-D mammography is still used. As of 2025, the number of accredited machines in the US that can perform 2-D or 3-D mammography is roughly equivalent.( 44 ) Lee et al.( 45 ) showed that roughly 50% of women used 2-D mammography even when 3-D mammography was available. Further, when women attended facilities with equal access to 2-D and 3-D mammography, the women more likely to be screened with 2-D mammography were more often Black, lower education level, and in the lowest income quartile.( 45 ) While 2-D mammography is no longer dominant, it is still used by a subset of women, including those more likely to experience adverse breast cancer outcomes. Thus, continued research of 2-D mammography-based breast composition measures is needed to ensure that advances in understanding breast cancer etiology are relevant to all women. These limitations are balanced by several strengths. This study evaluated digital mammograms, which represent the current standard of care for mammography. Use of native digital files eliminated the potential for loss or distortion of texture variability that may occur when film images are digitized. All images were acquired on machines from a single vendor, eliminating potential bias that may have been introduced by vendor-specific processing algorithms, which are often proprietary. We were able to further adjust for the specific machine used and software version number using an established data harmonization method to account for any residual machine-related variability. Texture feature measurements were produced using an automated quantitative texture feature pipeline, allowing high throughput and reproducible data. Additionally, extraction of texture from the whole breast image allows for a more representative estimation of breast texture, in contrast to other methods in which a region of interest is pre-selected for extraction. We used several recruitment strategies to reduce potential for selection bias, including recruiting from multiple imaging facilities, approaching potential participants in mornings and afternoons to account for differential availability, using in-person and remote enrollment methods, and engaging a bilingual research coordinator to enroll Spanish-speaking women. In summary, we found that parenchymal texture features were associated with several epidemiologic breast cancer risk factors, but a majority of variation in texture feature group was not explained by the conventional risk factors included in this study. Investigation of novel variables related to body composition, breast composition, and adiposity may provide more insight into the biological factors that contribute to parenchymal texture patterns. A lack of association with parity and age at first birth suggests that transient changes in breast composition induced by pregnancy make less of a contribution to parenchymal texture. Additional analyses that consider additional reproductive variables like breastfeeding history and the length of time since last birth are needed to confirm this hypothesis. This study focused on radiomic texture features. Artificial intelligence (AI) has shown success in improving breast cancer detection and risk prediction,( 46 – 48 ) though most work seeking to apply AI-defined textural features has focused on clinically directed tasks. The continued analysis of parenchymal texture complements these advances by defining breast tissue characteristics of the that may contribute to or mediate breast cancer risk. This information is essential for identifying risk mechanisms that might be translated into new cancer prevention approaches and for understanding mechanisms of treatment response and treatment resistance. As AI capabilities for image analysis continue to advance, there will be even greater potential to understand breast cancer etiology and define texture features associated with high-risk biological phenotypes. Supplementary Material 1 2