1.0 INTRODUCTION Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is responsible for over 14,000 deaths yearly in the US and is associated with poor survival despite an intense combination of treatments. 1 Significant racial disparities in HNSCC survival outcomes exist; 2 , 3 HNSCC has the third largest difference in mortality between non-Hispanic white (NHW) and Black patients of all cancer types. 2 Although numerous studies describe disparities in survival among Black and NHW patients with HNSCC 4 – 6 , disparities in outcomes among Hispanic patients with HNSCC remain understudied. 5 Similar to Black patients with HNSCC, Hispanic patients with HNSCC often have lower socioeconomic status, present with more advanced-stage disease at diagnosis, experience more barriers to care, and receive worse quality of care compared with non-Hispanic patients with HNSCC. 7 – 12 Outside the context of HNSCC, Hispanic patients in the US tend to have better health outcomes than Non-Hispanic patients despite facing a range of socioeconomic and psychosocial disadvantages, 13 , 14 a phenomenon known as the Hispanic health paradox (HHP). 15 , 16 Although Hispanic people are a heterogeneous group 17 , 18 from diverse cultural, socioeconomic, and genetic backgrounds, the HHP has been observed across a variety of oncologic 16 , 19 – 23 and non-oncologic contexts. 24 – 26 In the oncology setting, the HHP is particularly well studied in screen-eligible cancers such as breast, colorectal, and lung, 16 , 19 – 21 cancers for which early detection can significantly improve survival. 27 To date, a limited number of studies have evaluated the HHP among patients with HNSCC. HNSCC is a malignancy for which no population-level screening program exists, leading to symptomatic diagnosis that is frequently at an advanced stage. In addition, none of the studies evaluating the HHP among patients with HNSCC have specifically controlled for important social determinants of health (SDOH), 28 which could potentially explain observed differences in survival between Hispanic and non-Hispanic patients with HNSCC 29 , 30 . Therefore, to address important gaps in our understanding of the HHP among patients with HNSCC and in different cancer contexts, the objective of this systematic review and meta-analysis is to determine whether Hispanic patients with HNSCC have better survival outcomes than NHW patients with HNSCC. 2.0 METHODS 2.1 Information Source and Search Strategy This study was conducted according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (“PRISMA”) guidelines. 31 To identify studies for inclusion in this review, a research informationist (E.A.B) developed detailed search strategies in PubMed (U.S. National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health), Scopus (Elsevier), and CINAHL Complete (EBSCOhost). The databases were searched from inception through January 11, 2024. The search strategies used a combination of subject headings (e.g., MeSH in PubMed) and keywords for the concepts of head and neck cancer, ethnicity and race, and survival. The PubMed search strategy was modified for the other two databases, replacing MeSH terms with appropriate subject headings when available and maintaining similar keywords. The search strategies for each database are detailed in Appendix A . This study was registered on the PROSPERO database with the reference number CRD42024498968. 2.2 Screening and Study Selection References were exported into the review management software, Covidence (Covidence systematic review software, Veritas Health Innovation, Melbourne, Australia) for de-duplication and study selection. Two reviewers (A.R.M., D.P.N.) independently screened titles and abstracts, and then full-text articles to determine eligibility. Conflicts were resolved through discussion. The MedCalc Software Ltd. Inter-rater agreement test, the Cohen’s Kappa (K), was calculated for screening title and abstract, and full-text to assess reviewers’ agreement. 32 , 33 Study inclusion criteria were: original peer-reviewed publication which included patients aged 18 years or older diagnosed with HNSCC, reported patients’ race and ethnicity, reported oncologic outcomes (overall survival (OS) or cancer-specific survival (CSS)), and performed multivariable analysis for the association of Hispanic ethnicity with OS or CSS adjusted for demographic, SDOH, or clinical variables. Studies were excluded if they: included patients treated outside the United States (US), were not available in English, did not have full-text available for review, or were a review article. 2.3 Quality Assessment We critically appraised the level of evidence of included articles using the Oxford Center for Evidence-Based Medicine (OCEBM) criteria. 34 Two authors (A.R.M. and D.P.N.) independently performed risk assessments using the Risk of Bias in Non-Randomized Studies–of Exposure (ROBINS-E) tool. 35 This tool assesses bias from confounding, exposure measurement, patient selection, post-exposure interventions, missing data, outcome measurement, and selection of reported results. Each study was assessed and categorized as having a “low,” “moderate,” or “serious” risk of bias according to standard categories. 35 2.4 Data Items and Data Collection Process The variables to be extracted and the criteria for categorization were defined a priori . Two reviewers (A.R.M. and D.P.N.) independently extracted the data and compared results to ensure accuracy. Descriptive study information included author, publication year, study design, OCEBM evidence level, data source (categorized as single-institutional, multi-institutional, registry, or database), and facility type (e.g., academic center, VA Medical Center). The primary outcome was OS and the secondary outcome was CSS. Covariates were categorized as demographic, SDOH, and clinical. Demographic factors included age, sex, race, ethnicity, and marital status. SDOH included health insurance, education, income, and travel distance from the treatment facility. Clinical factors included Charlson/Deyo comorbidity score, HNSCC subsite, human papillomavirus (HPV) status, stage, treatment type, extranodal extension (ENE), and margin status. For each covariate, we noted the presence or absence of an association with survival in the individual study’s multivariable model. Because of the importance of covariate adjustment in minimizing residual unmeasured confounding between Hispanic ethnicity and survival, we classify the extensiveness of adjustment in each study as minimal (ie, adjusted for only one of the three previously defined categories [demographic, SDOH, clinical]), moderate (adjusted for two of the categories of covariates), or extensive (adjusted for all three categories of covariates). 16 Data collection and analysis occurred from March 1, 2024, until May 31, 2024. 2.5 Data Analysis and Synthesis of Results (Statistical Analysis) Meta-analysis of aHR for OS and CSS was performed with Cochrane Review Manager (RevMan) version 5.4 (The Cochrane Collaboration 2020). For the meta-analysis, we excluded overlapping studies from the same cancer subsites based on a detailed comparison of participant cohorts and data sources. To address the fact that some studies combined race and ethnicity into one category (ie, NHW vs Hispanic white (HW)) and other studies reported race and ethnicity separately (ie, White vs non-white race and then Hispanic vs non-Hispanic ethnicity), we conducted separate meta-analyses for each categorization schema of race and ethnicity. The first meta-analysis was performed on studies that combined race and ethnicity into one category, comparing survival among HW patients with HNSCC versus NHW patients with HNSCC. The second meta-analysis was performed on studies that analyzed race and ethnicity as separate categories, comparing survival among Hispanic patients with HNSCC versus non-Hispanic patients with HNSCC (regardless of whether the patients were from a White, Black, or Asian racial group) Meta-analysis of continuous measures and meta-analysis of proportions were performed using Comprehensive Meta-Analysis version 4 (Biostat Inc, Englewood, NJ, USA). Each measure (aHR, mean, or proportion) and 95% confidence interval (CI) was weighted according to the number of patients in the study. Random effects models were used due to presumed heterogeneity across the studies. 36 , 37 Potential publication bias was evaluated by visual inspection of the funnel plot and Egger’s regression test, which statistically examines the asymmetry of the funnel plot. 38 , 39 A two-sided p -value 0.05 indicates statistical significance. 3.0 RESULTS 3.1 Search Results and Risk of Bias As shown in the PRISMA diagram ( Figure 1 ), electronic searches found 3272 citations. After removing duplicates, 2106 unique abstracts were left, of which 1894 were excluded based on their titles and abstracts. In screening the title and abstract, there was 92.9% agreement between reviewers (K = 0.83; 95% CI 0.79 to 0.87). 40 Of the 212 full-text articles reviewed, 25 studies were included in the systematic review, and 22 non-overlapping studies were included in the meta-analysis (89.0% agreement between reviewers; K = 0.77; 95% CI 0.64 to 0.91). 40 The included studies were all OCEBM levels 2b and 3b. Critical appraisal of non-randomized studies ( Figure 2 ) indicated an overall acceptably low risk of bias, with potential sources of bias being most pronounced due to confounding and selection of participants. A funnel plot with Egger’s test (0.36 [−0.78 to 1.50], p = 0.52) demonstrated minimal publication bias ( Figure S1 ). 3.2 Study Sources and Study Characteristics in Systematic Review Of the 25 studies in the systematic review, 8 were from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program (SEER) database, 11 were from the National Cancer Database (NCDB), one was from the California Cancer Registry, one was from the Florida Cancer Data Registry (FCDR), and 4 were single or multi-institutional studies. Patients were treated between 1973 and 2019. When characterizing the extent of covariate adjustment, no studies (0%) had minimal covariate adjustment, 9 studies (36%) had moderate covariate adjustment, and 16 studies (64%) had extensive covariate adjustment. Table 1 shows the characteristics of the 21 studies featuring 27 cohorts of patients included in the systematic review comparing OS among HW patients with HNSCC to NHW patients with HNSCC. Of these 27 cohorts, 8 (29.6%) reported an OS advantage for HW patients with HNSCC, 19 (70.4%) reported no difference in survival between HW and NHW patients with HNSCC, and none (0%) demonstrated an OS disadvantage for HW patients with HNSCC relative to NHW patients with HNSCC. Table 2 includes 4 studies (with 5 cohorts of patients) that compared survival among Hispanic patients with HNSCC to non-Hispanic patients with HNSCC. Overall, 3 of 5 cohorts (60%) reported an OS advantage for Hispanic patients with HNSCC relative to non-Hispanic patients with HNSCC, 2 of 5 cohorts (40%) reported no difference in survival, and none of the cohorts demonstrated an OS disadvantage for Hispanic patients with HNSCC relative to non-Hispanic patients with HNSCC. 3.2 Meta-analysis of Demographic, Clinical, and SDOH Characteristics A total of 657,185 patients with HNSCC were included in the meta-analysis of demographic factors, with a mean age of 60.8 years (range 18–90, 95% CI: 59.9 to 61.8). Overall, 72.1% (95% CI, 54.1 to 86.9) were male, 65.7% (95% CI: 58.8% to 72.3%) were NHW patients, and 12.8% (95% CI: 10.7% to 15.1%) were non-Hispanic Black (NHB) patients. Of the 481,342 patients with HNSCC included in the meta-analysis of clinical factors, 27% had oral cavity SCC (95% CI: 19.6% to 33.4%), 11.5% (95% CI: 7.6% to 16.3%) were HPV-positive, and 34.1% (95% CI: 29.9% to 39.4%) were diagnosed as AJCC Stage I-II. A total of 395,000 patients with HNSCC were included in the meta-analysis of SDOH, of whom 15.4% (95% CI: 12.7% to 18.2%) had no insurance or were on Medicaid, and 16% (95% CI: 10.4% to 21.3%) had a median income of less than $30,000. 3.3 Meta-analysis of OS and CSS Among NHW patients with HNSCC vs HW patients with HNSCC Figure 3 shows the meta-analysis of OS of HW patients with HNSCC relative to NHW patients with HNSCC from 17 non-overlapping studies with 22 distinct cohorts (n = 321,992 patients). Overall, HW patients with HNSCC had a 12% reduction in adjusted mortality compared with NHW patients with HNSCC (aHR = 0.88, 95% CI, 0.84 to 0.92). Four studies, comprising a total of 77,847 people, were included in the meta-analysis examining the CSS among HW patients with HNSCC relative to NHW patients with HNSCC. As shown in Figure 4 , HW patients with HNSCC had a 10% reduction in adjusted cancer-specific mortality relative to NHW patients with HNSCC (aHR = 0.90, 95% CI, 0.86 to 0.95). A meta-analysis of 3 studies with 6 cohorts (n = 60,625 overall; n = 2,153 HW) stratified by HPV status was performed ( Figure 5 ). In the HPV-negative cohorts (n = 18,495 overall; n = 500 HW), there was no difference in OS for HW patients with HNSC relative to NHW patients with HNSCC (aHR = 0.82, 95% CI, 0.64 to 1.04). In the HPV-positive cohorts (n = 42,130 overall; n = 1,653 HW), there was no difference in OS for HW patients with HNSCC compared with NHW patients with HNSCC (aHR = 1.00, 95% CI, 0.88 to 1.14). A meta-analysis of 7 studies with 11 cohorts (n = 135402 overall; n = 6281 HW) with OPSCC was performed ( Figure S2 ). Among patients with OPSCC there was an improvement of 9% in OS for HW patients with OPSCC compared with NHW patients with OPSCC (aHR = 0.91, 95% CI, 0.85 to 0.98). A meta-analysis of 3 studies with 3 cohorts (n = 26917 overall; n = 1728 HW) with NPC was performed ( Figure S3 ). Among patients with NPC there was no difference in OS for HW patients with NPC compared with NHW patients with NPC (aHR = 0.93, 95% CI, 0.79 to 1.10). 3.4 Meta-analysis of OS and CSS Among Non-Hispanic patients with HNSCC vs Hispanic patients with HNSCC A second meta-analysis of 3 studies with 4 cohorts (n = 369,371 overall; n = 14,726 Hispanic patients) was performed based on studies that analyzed race and ethnicity as separate categories (ie Hispanic patients with HNSCC versus non-Hispanic patients with HNSCC, regardless of racial group). As shown in Figure 6 , Hispanic patients with HNSCC had a 20% lower likelihood of adjusted mortality than non-Hispanic patients with HNSCC (aHR = 0.80, 95% CI, 0.74 to 0.85). No analyses of CSS or OS stratified by HPV status were performed in this group due to the small ‘n’. 4.0 DISCUSSION To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review and meta-analysis examining the association of Hispanic ethnicity with survival outcomes among patients with HNSCC. Our findings demonstrate that Hispanic patients with HNSCC have lower overall mortality and cancer-specific mortality than non-Hispanic patients with HNSCC, further supporting the existence of the HHP within a cancer with profound racial disparities in survival. Prior research has documented the HHP in various health contexts, notably in cardiovascular diseases and other screen-eligible cancer types, where Hispanic individuals exhibit better health outcomes despite worse risk factor profiles. 13 Our results align with these studies, suggesting that the paradox could extend to non-screen-eligible cancers such as HNSCC, a finding that has not been robustly explored until now. There are a number of potential explanations for the HHP and the consistent observation of better health outcomes among Hispanic patients in the US relative to non-Hispanic patients in the US. 41 – 43 The ‘salmon bias’ hypothesis suggests that the better health outcomes observed among Hispanic patients is due to the return of immigrants to their country of origin as they become older or ill, leaving only healthy Hispanic patients in the US to contribute to mortality data. 42 However, a study by Abraido-Lanza et al. detailed that the salmon bias does not account for the lower mortality rates observed among Cubans and US-born Hispanic patients compared with NHW patients or for Puerto Ricans, whose deaths in Puerto Rico are recorded in the US death registration system. 42 A more recent study by Turra et al. provided evidence supporting the salmon bias hypothesis, although the effect size was too small to account for the observed survival differences. 44 The ‘Healthy Migrant’ hypothesis, which suggests that the HHP is due to immigrants being healthier than the average population in origin and destination countries, is another potential explanation for the HHP. Evidence supporting this hypothesis is mixed 42 , 45 , 46 Although this systematic review-meta-analysis didn’t have enough studies to stratify by US-born versus non-US-born Hispanic patients, an included study by Parasher et al. demonstrated that US-born Hispanic patients with HNSCC still exhibit better survival than NHW patients. 28 If neither the salmon bias nor the healthy migrant hypothesis fully explains the HHP, other potential mechanisms include the role of community and social support. The ‘barrio advantage’ demonstrates how strong community networks and social cohesion in Hispanic neighborhoods lead to better health outcomes despite socioeconomic disadvantages. 14 , 47 Contrary to the theory that poorer neighborhoods always exhibit worse health outcomes, this phenomenon highlights the importance of strong social support networks. 47 Hispanic people’s cultural values, such as ‘familismo,’ 48 which emphasizes strong family connections, and ‘respecto,’ 49 which promotes mutual respect, foster environments that encourage healthier behaviors and facilitate information sharing. 47 Additionally, the resilience developed through shared experiences of overcoming adversity strengthens these communities’ ability to cope with health challenges effectively. 50 A systematic review by Price et al. discussed this phenomenon in the context of lung cancer, suggesting that social and cultural factors in Hispanic neighborhoods can lead to improved survival. 16 Other studies have suggested that diet and health behaviors may contribute to this survival advantage in Hispanic patients. 51 , 52 Collectively, these studies suggest that understanding the community support, culture, and health behavior factors that may lead to better health outcomes in Hispanic populations could be an important strategy to improve survival in all patients. Yanez et al. have created a conceptual model describing how social, cultural, behavioral, disease-specific, and medical factors determine outcomes such as morbidity, mortality, and quality of life among Hispanic people with cancer. 53 Social factors such as socioeconomic status, education, and insurance influence access to care and awareness of cancer prevention and treatment. 54 , 55 Cultural factors include beliefs and practices that can delay seeking treatment or deter patients from opting for early detection. 50 , 56 Behavioral factors, including diet and smoking, represent significant lifestyle choices that impact cancer risk and outcomes. 51 , 52 , 57 Disease-specific factors address the type and stage of cancer at diagnosis, which may be influenced by exposure to risk factors. 53 Medical factors include the presence of comorbidities, which can significantly influence treatment decisions and outcomes. 58 Even though we included studies with aHR that help control for many disease-specific and social factors affecting survival outcomes, the studies in this systematic review and meta-analysis did not address many of the cultural and psychosocial factors outlined in the conceptual model. By not examining these factors, our study may overlook key elements that contribute to the differences in HNSCC survival outcomes among Hispanic patients. Although our study focuses on mortality, other cancer outcomes, such as morbidity and quality of life among Hispanic people with HNSCC. 53 A meta-analysis by Luckett et al. reported that Hispanic patients with cancer suffered considerably more psychosocial distress, experienced poorer social well-being, and had a lower overall quality of life compared to other ethnic minoritized groups, even when adjusted for SES. 59 These outcomes are particularly important for patients with HNSCC because previous studies have found that HNSCC survivors experience high rates of negative psychosocial outcomes such as depression, anxiety, body image distress, and suicide mortality. 60 – 62 4.1 Limitations Our findings should be interpreted within the context of important limitations. There is significant heterogeneity within the Hispanic population (e.g., people from Puerto Rico, Mexico, Cuba, and other Latin American countries) that is not accounted for within the HHP, and this study results in differences in environmental and cultural factors that may affect survival outcomes differently. Another limitation of this meta-analysis is the lack of detailed data to fully explore the underlying reasons for the observed differences in survival between Hispanic and non-Hispanic white patients with HNSCC. Additionally, although our study used aHR to control for potentially confounding demographic, SDOH and clinical variables, adjustment was certainly incomplete, and there is the potential for unmeasured residual confounding such as socioeconomic status, access to healthcare, and cultural factors, which were not consistently adjusted across all studies. Although the overall sample size was large, the small number of HW patients limited our ability to detect potentially important effects, particularly among the HPV-negative population. In addition, the lack of information on whether patients were first-, second- or third-generation immigrants introduces additional variability that we could not account for, potentially serving as a confounder. Immigration status has been found to influence the incidence of HNSCC 63 , but future studies are needed to investigate Hispanic ethnicity and immigrant status in HNSCC survival. Despite our efforts to carefully select studies and minimize redundancy in patients who may be represented in multiple datasets, the potential for overlapping patient populations across datasets such as SEER and NCDB nevertheless remains, as does the inherent variability in the quality and scope of available data, which may affect the generalizability of our findings. 5.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, HW patients with HNSCC exhibit better OS and CSS compared with NHW patients with HNSCC, supporting evidence of the HHP in this patient population. Further research is necessary to understand the characteristics and mechanisms driving this survival advantage, which may provide insights into improving outcomes for all patients with HNSCC. Supplementary Material Fig S1 Figure S1: Funnel Plot of included studies to assess publication bias among included studies Fig S2 Figure S2: Forest plot of overall survival for non-overlapping studies of OPSCC that compared Hispanic White patients to non-Hispanic White patients Fig S3 Figure S3: Forest plot of overall survival for non-overlapping studies of NPC that compared Hispanic White patients to non-Hispanic White patients Appendix A Appendix A: Search Strategy for each database included