Introduction With a lifetime risk of 12.9% and an age-adjusted incidence rate of 128.3 per 100,000 women during 2015–2019, breast cancer is the most common non-cutaneous cancer among women in the United States [ 1 ]. Breast cancer incidence tends to be lower in places with higher social vulnerability, while the opposite trend was seen for breast cancer mortality [ 2 – 8 ]. Area-level social vulnerability, a construct that aggregates social economic status (SES), age and family structure, and various indicators of economic distress at a geographic level (e.g., census tract), can interact with individual level biological, SES, and behavioral factors, such as age, genetic disposition, use of hormone supplements, as well as gravidity and parity, to affect incidence patterns [ 2 – 8 ]. Potential explanations for the negative association between area-level social vulnerability and breast cancer incidence include higher rates of under- and no-insurance, and lower availability and accessibility of healthcare in regions with higher compared to lower social vulnerability [ 4 , 9 , 10 ]. These epidemiological findings suggest that policies that seek to increase health insurance coverage could improve access to both screening mammography and other healthcare encounters, and result in the earlier detection of breast cancer, which can improve overall survival [ 4 , 9 , 10 ]. Thus, to evaluate the effect of such policies, one can examine changes in the incidence rate, particularly early stage cancer incidence, across areas with varied SES before and after the implementation of the policy using methods such as difference-in-difference (DID) approach [ 11 ]. Indeed, studies using similar thinking have examined the effect of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) and its Medicaid expansion on cancer related outcomes, including early detection, timely treatment and overall survival [ 12 – 16 ]. Enacted in March 2010, ACA is a federal law aiming to provide improved healthcare affordability through a variety of mechanisms, including expanded enrollment in health insurance. Many provisions under ACA affect various aspects of cancer care continuum, such as establishment of the Health Insurance Marketplace, elimination of cost-sharing for preventive services, and elimination of preexisting condition exclusions or refusals [ 17 ]. More importantly, coverage of clinical preventive services, such as breast cancer screening is supported by ACA. However, detailed degrees of coverage vary by health insurance types [ 17 ]. For example, the ACA’s Medicaid expansion also extended adult preventive benefits to newly eligible individuals (i.e., non-elderly adults with family incomes ≤ 138% of the federal poverty level), though the coverage of preventive services remains a state option, and not all states adopted the expansion [ 18 ]. Studies comparing states with and without expansion demonstrated that Medicaid expansion was associated with greater healthcare coverage, and improved access to cancer screening services through increased preventive services utilization, which narrowed the disparities in cancer diagnosis and care access [ 13 , 14 , 16 , 19 – 26 ]. However, prior studies mainly focused on comparing individuals residing in states with and without the expansion to assess the impact of ACA’s Medicaid expansion, while little is known about its impact on breast cancer incidence across neighborhoods with varied social vulnerability within an expansion state [ 27 , 28 ]. California is one of the first states to expand its Medicaid program (Medi-Cal), which was effective January 1, 2014 [ 29 ]. Between 2012 and 2016 in California, uninsured rates among adults ages 19 to 64 had dropped from 22 to 10%, significantly affecting access to healthcare services [ 30 ]. While the enrollment in commercial insurance was stabilized between 13.9% and 14.1% during 2012–2015 [ 31 ], the Medi-Cal enrollment changed from 7.2–2.9% in the pre-expansion period of 2010–2013 to 9.9–13.5% in the post-expansion period of 2014–2017. However, it has been well-known that there is a wide geographic variation of breast cancer incidence across California [ 8 ]. For example, during years 2015–2019, the difference in breast cancer incidence between the top and bottom ranked counties was twofold, with the age-adjusted incidence rate of 155.7 (95% CI: 147.4–164.4) versus 74.4 (95% CI: 45.1–117.6) cases per 100,000 persons in Marin versus Modoc County [ 32 ]. Despite these geographic disparities, no study has investigated changes in breast cancer incidence rates associated with Medicaid expansion in California, a state with a large Hispanic and Asian population. To address this gap, we employed a DID approach to investigate pre-post expansion changes in breast cancer incidence rates overall and by cancer stage, across neighborhoods with varied social vulnerabilities. Based on two prior studies that investigated the impact of ACA’s Medicaid expansion on cancer diagnosis using individual level data within Ohio and Pennsylvania, two expansion states [ 27 , 28 ], we hypothesized a greater increase of breast cancer incidence rate in neighborhoods of higher than lower social vulnerability between the pre (2010–2013) and post (2014–2017) period of the Medi-Cal expansion. We chose census tract to define neighborhoods, as it is designed to be a homogeneous geographic unit that is stable over time and can reasonably represent the social vulnerability of its residents. We used the census tract-level social vulnerability index (SVI) developed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as a comprehensive indicator of neighborhood social vulnerability as demonstrated by previous studies [ 33 ]. The current study complemented the existing literature on examining the effect of Medicaid expansion specifically and the effect of overall ACA. We also extended prior studies by focusing on the policy impact at the neighborhood level. These place-based results may facilitate the continued discussion around health care reform, as states are consider whether to adopt and how to implement the expansion, in addition to informing cancer prevention efforts. Methods Data source and study population We used data from the Synthetic California Breast Cancer Registry data (SynCan), a pilot dataset generated by the surveillance, epidemiology, and end results (SEER) Program ( https://seer.cancer.gov/ ) sponsored by the National Cancer Institute (NCI). Similar to the current SEER research dataset, SynCan includes anonymized case-level data (e.g., demographic and cancer characteristics), and a set of linked area-level variables including the CDC’s SVI variables. SEER does not make available unencrypted census tract indicators to allow for small-area cancer incidence calculations, but the SynCan data includes synthetic census tract information, generated using classification and regression tree models [ 34 , 35 ]. The research team first conducted the analysis using the synthetic data only, then submitted the analytical code to a third party, who acted as an honest broker between NCI and the research team and applied the analytical code to the SEER data to generate results in the current study. Thus, the results presented here were based on the actual cancer incidence data. This secondary analysis of county-level incidence based on anonymized data did not require Institutional Review Board approval due to its exempted status. Outcome Variable Census tract-level breast cancer incidence was the main outcome, calculated by extracting annual population counts and breast cancer cases from all stages (summary stage information available in SEER [ 36 ]) diagnosed during years 2010–2017 among women aged between 20 and 64 years, the target age group of Medicaid expansion, as the expansion is designed to help non-elderly adults with income at or up to 138% of the federal poverty level. Other than age restriction, no other exclusion criteria were applied. The study sample included all cases that were within our specified age group, that were diagnosed in the state of California and released by SEER in April 2020. The study population included 8007 census tracts in California. We also conducted sensitivity analyses among the screening eligible younger age group (age 40–64), and screening eligible older age group (age 65–74) who were not the target age group of Medicaid expansion. We did not age-adjust the cancer incidence rates in the main analysis because age structure is highly correlated with its social vulnerability (due to factors such as education level and employment) and was also factored in the calculation of SVI, which was a key exposure variable. Given the expansion would impact different age groups disproportionally, and such impact was part of the DID, the current study aimed to examine, adjusting the outcome for age would mask or attenuate the estimated impact of the expansion. Nevertheless, we also conducted sensitivity analysis using age-adjusted incidence. Exposure variable The key exposure measure was social vulnerability, as measured by the CDC’s SVI based on the 5-year estimate of 2012–2016 American Community Surveys (ACS) data [ 33 ]. The SVI was developed to indicate a community’s vulnerability and resilience in facing external stress on human health and wellbeing [ 33 ]. In addition to the overall SVI, there are also four theme-specific SVIs corresponding to the neighborhood’s (1) SES, (2) household composition and disability, (3) minority status and language, and (4) housing type and transportation. SVI is a relative measure for vulnerability of census tracts, ranging from 0 to 1 with a higher value indicating a community more vulnerable. We used tertiles of SVI to group the census tracts into neighborhoods with low, medium, and high vulnerability levels. Statistical analysis We employed a DID approach to examine the differential impact of ACA’s Medicaid expansion in California on breast cancer incidence rates overall and by cancer stage across census tracts. DID is a quasi-experimental design that compares the pre-intervention difference in outcomes (incidence rate) between the treatment/control groups (tracts with high, medium, and low social vulnerabilities) to the post-intervention difference, and attributes the “DID” to the effect of the intervention (Medi-Cal expansion). The size and significance of the DID is assessed by including an interaction term between a treatment–control indicator variable and a pre/post indicator variable in a regression model [ 11 , 37 ]. We considered the period from January 2010 to December 2013 as the pre-expansion period, and the time from January 2014 to December 2017 as the post-expansion period. Low-SVI census tract was the reference group. We fitted a Poisson regression model, where census tract-level breast cancer case count was the response variable, and census tract’s population size in natural log form was used as the offset. The model included a variable indicating pre-post expansion period, SVI tertile, and their interaction term. To assess the validity of a DID approach, which assumes the outcome trends for the groups are parallel, we graphically examined the yearly incidence rate over time, as well as included a group-specific linear trend in the regression. We also conducted three sensitivity analyses and presented the results in the Appendix . To better differentiate the impact of expansion that were more closely related to breast cancer screenings as opposed to diagnoses through other healthcare encounters, we repeated the main analysis among the screening eligible younger age group (age 40–64, results shown in Tables A1 , A2 ) and screening eligible older age group (age 65–74, results shown in Tables A3 , A4 ). Since Medicaid was not targeting those older than 65 years, the 65–74 age group can be viewed as a negative control. The third sensitivity analysis was using age-adjusted incidence in the main model (results shown in Tables A6 , A7 ). In addition, we assessed the stability of the age structure patterns over the study period ( Table A8 , Figs. A1 , A2 ). We reported the estimated incidence rate across neighborhoods with high, medium, and low-SVI, as well as their within and between group differences. We estimated the incidence rate ratio (IRR) during the pre (2010–2013) and post (2014–2017) expansion periods, respectively, where the ratio was the incidence rate in high-SVI or medium-SVI neighborhoods compared to that in the low-SVI neighborhoods. Finally, for the impact of Medi-Cal expansion, we reported the relative IRR estimates derived from the interaction term (i.e., the DID estimate). The main model leveraged overall SVI as the exposure variable and applied it to both entire and stage-specific datasets. We also conducted sensitivity analysis using the four theme-specific SVIs as the exposure variables in four separate models and applied to all stage-combined data. All statistical analyses were performed using SAS software version 9.4. Results Changes across neighborhoods defined by the overall SVI: Prior to the Medi-Cal expansion (2010–2013), the annual incidence in neighborhoods with high, medium, and low-SVI was 93.61, 122.03, and 151.12 new breast cancer cases per 100,000 women aged between 20 to 64 years, respectively, and was 96.49, 122.07, and 150.66 in the post-expansion period (2014–2017). High-SVI and medium-SVI neighborhoods had lower incidence rates compared with low-SVI neighborhoods during both the pre- and post-expansion period, which was also confirmed by below one IRR values (range 0.62–0.81). Neighborhoods with high-SVI experienced a positive pre-post change (2.88 cases per 100,000), while neighborhoods with low-SVI experienced a negative pre-post change (− 0.46 cases per 100,000), and a slight increase (0.04 cases per 100,000) was found in neighborhoods with medium-SVI (within group comparison in Table 1 ). Compared to low-SVI neighborhoods, both medium-SVI and high-SVI neighborhoods experienced a larger pre-post change, where the absolute difference in the pre-post change was 0.50 and 3.34 cases per 100,000, respectively (between group comparison in Table 1 ). The estimated DID was only significant when comparing the high-SVI versus low-SVI neighborhoods (relative IRR = 1.03 (95% CI, 1.00 to 1.06, p = 0.026) ( Table 1 ), but not between the medium-SVI and low-SVI neighborhoods (relative IRR = 1.00, 95% CI, 0.98–1.03, p = 0.804) ( Table 1 ). The results from stratified analyses by cancer stages showed that the cancer incidence in the localized stage had a similar pattern: high-SVI neighborhoods experienced a positive pre-post change from 50.32 to 52.97 cases per 100,000 (pre-post change of 2.65 cases per 100,000), and the estimated DID was only significant when comparing high to low-SVI neighborhoods (relative IRR = 1.05; 95% CI, 1.01–1.09, p = 0.013) ( Table 1 ). No significant DID estimates were found for the regional and distant breast cancer incidence. Changes across neighborhoods defined by the theme-specific SVIs: Similar results were found when using theme-specific SVIs to group the census tracts ( Table 2 ). Statistically significant DID was found when comparing the high-SVI to low-SVI neighborhoods but not when medium-SVI was compared to low-SVI. In addition, the significant DID was only found for the SES-themed SVI (relative IRR = 1.05, 95% CI, 1.02–1.08, p = 0.001), the minority status and language SVI (relative IRR = 1.06, 95% CI, 1.03–1.09, p 0.001), and the housing type and transportation SVI (relative IRR = 1.04, 95% CI, 1.01–1.07, p = 0.007), while the DID for the household composition and disability themed SVI was not found significant (relative IRR = 1.01, 95% CI, 0.98–1.04, p = 0.682) ( Table 2 ). Both graphic examination ( Fig. 1 , panels 1–4) and the linear trend tests for the overall and stratified analyses (all p 0.05, except for high-SVI with p = 0.045 for the overall incidence, Table 1 ) indicated that the parallel-trend assumption was reasonable. We found similar results ( Tables A1 , A2 ) among the screening eligible younger age group (age 40–64) to those among all younger age group (age 20–64). Prior to the Medicaid expansion, the overall incidence rate was 167.66, 197.84, and 224.73 cases per 100,000 persons among tracts with high, medium, and low-SVI, respectively; and was 173.58, 197.89, and 228.90 cases per 100,000 persons during the post-expansion period, respectively. The IRR between high and low vulnerability neighborhoods was 0.75 and 0.76 in the pre- and post-expansion period, respectively; and the relative IRR of 1.03 (95% CI 1.00–1.06, p = 0.044) between high and low-SVI neighborhoods. In addition, significant difference-indifference estimate was only found for localized breast cancer (relative IRR = 1.05; 95% CI, 1.1.09, p = 0.031) between high and low-SVI neighborhoods, not for regional and distant cancer stage. Similar results were also found when using theme-specific SVIs ( Table A2 ). The significant DID was found for the SES-themed SVI (relative IRR = 1.05, 95% CI, 1.02–1.08, p = 0.002), the minority status and language SVI (relative IRR = 1.06, 95% CI, 1.03–1.10, p 0.001), and the housing type and transportation SVI (relative IRR = 1.04, 95% CI, 1.01–1.07, p = 0.015), while the DID for the household composition and disability themed SVI was not found significant (relative IRR = 1.00, 95% CI, 0.97–1.03, p = 0.80). Among the negative control group (i.e., screening eligible older age group of 65–74 years), we did not find significant impact of Medicaid expansion ( Table A3 ). Also, as expected, sensitivity analysis using age-adjusted incidence rate showed that the DID estimate was no longer statistically significant ( Table A5 ). In addition, as shown in Appendix Table A8 and Figs. A1 , A2 , we found a stable age structure pattern over the study period across neighborhoods defined by SVIs. Discussion Using a population-based cancer registry data from California spanning from 2010 to 2017, we found that the incidence rates of breast cancer in neighborhoods with both high and medium social vulnerabilities increased after California expanded its Medicaid program. The pre-post change was greater in high-SVI neighborhoods and was significant when compared to low-SVI neighborhoods. Further, we found that the impact of Medi-Cal expansion was mainly on the incidence rate for local stage, not regional or distant stage. These positive changes likely reflect the improved access to preventive cancer screening and other healthcare services under the ACA’s Medi-Cal expansion. Although the relationship between cancer screening and cancer incidence is dynamic over time and may stabilize after screening has disseminated in the population [ 38 , 39 ], our findings showed that there was a positive impact of preventive services, such as mammogram screening, on breast cancer incidence, especially early-stage incidence shortly after the policy implementation. The findings suggest that combining individual- and place-based intervention could potentially be more effective in improving public health and reducing breast cancer health disparities than single-level strategies. Prior studies based on individual data generally found Medicaid expansion under ACA improved health insurance coverage for low-income people who lacked insurance prior to the expansion [ 13 , 19 , 28 , 40 – 44 ]. However, most of the studies compared individuals residing in states with and without the expansion, except two studies that examined the impact of ACA’s Medicaid expansion in Ohio and Pennsylvania, two states with expansion effective January 2014 and January 2015, respectively.[ 27 ] The Ohio study found an increased proportion of women diagnosed with local stage breast cancer (from 60.2 to 62.6%) and decreased proportion of uninsured women (from 13.7 to 7.5%) when comparing pre and post-Medicaid expansion periods (2010–2013 vs. 2014–2017) [ 27 ]. The Pennsylvania study, which examined the impact of ACA overall rather than specifically the Medicaid expansion, found an increased early-stage breast cancer diagnosis among women 50–64 years of age during 2014–2016 compared to during 2010–2013 [ 28 ]. Our study differed from previous studies which was based on individual cases, as we examined the impact of the expansion at the neighborhood level. In addition, we expanded the current literature by demonstrating that even within an expansion state, the impact of Medicaid expansion was still discernable. The expansion increased the incidence rate by about 3 percentage points in high-SVI neighborhoods relative to their low-SVI counterparts. By further looking at the pre-post change on the breast cancer incidence by cancer stage, we found that the impact of the Medi-Cal expansion was mainly on the local stage breast cancer and most pronounced in high-SVI neighborhood in California. Results from the sensitivity analyses among the screening eligible younger (40–64) and older (65–74) age groups also helped to elucidate that Medi-Cal expansion improved access to preventive cancer screening to a larger extent in high- than low-SVI neighborhoods. These place-based results may facilitate the continued evaluation of health care reform and inform cancer prevention efforts. It is well-known that disparities exist along the breast cancer continuum, and the specific disparity pattern differs by the outcome of interest. Higher incidence rate tend to be among women with higher SES, while higher mortality rate tended to be found among women with lower SES. Part of these observed trends can be explained by area-level factors. For example, women with high SES tend to live in neighborhoods with lower social vulnerability, where there are better access to health care resources, including mammogram facilities and primary care doctors [ 27 , 28 ]. This is also consistent with our finding of higher breast cancer incidence across all stages except for the late stage (distant) in low-SVI neighborhoods compared to high-SVI and medium-SVI neighborhoods. Early diagnosis of breast cancer is a key determinant for better treatment options and ultimately a better survival. There has been an increased awareness of the impact of residential environment on cancer outcomes. By examining specifically how the Medi-Cal expansion affects census tract-level incidence rates of breast cancer, our results showed that individual-focused policy, such as Medicaid expansion, can intersect with neighborhoods. In addition to the main finding, our results from the theme-specific SVI analyses highlighted that neighborhoods with specific vulnerability associated with low SES, minority status and language barrier, as well as challenges in housing and transportation appeared to benefit the most from the Medi-Cal expansion. It is important to note the complexity of interpreting area-level breast cancer incidence [ 39 ]. On the one hand, increased incidence (i.e., increased cancer cases) is generally an undesirable outcome, and for breast cancer specifically, mammogram screening has also been argued as a double-edged sword as it has been linked to overdiagnosis [ 4 , 39 , 45 ]. On the other hand, increased incidence, particularly early stage cancer can be viewed as a desirable result stemming from improved cancer screening effort and can lead to anticipated survival benefit [ 39 ]. The latter is particularly preferable in the context of known breast cancer disparities, where a low screening rate accompanied by high rates of late-stage cancer diagnosis and high mortality among disadvantaged populations and in areas of high social vulnerability, as well as inadequate cancer screening and other health services capacities [ 1 – 10 ]. Therefore, future studies with longer follow-up are needed to further investigate the changes in survival among non-elderly women after the implemention of Medi-Cal. Our study has several limitations. First, while we used a DID approach to disentangle the impact of Medicaid expansion, we cannot rule out the influence of other policies including those under ACA during the same period on the observed changes in breast cancer incidence rate across different neighborhoods. Other ACA provisions, though not income or SES differentiated, implemented around the same time as the Medicaid expansion or earlier, such as the establishment of Health Insurance Marketplace in 2014 and the elimination of cost-sharing for preventive services in 2010, could also improve healthcare access including breast cancer screening and other health care services, and thus affect breast cancer incidence, and such impact may also vary across different neighborhoods. In addition, California had an early start on the Medicaid expansion to help prepare for and transition to 2014 [ 46 ]. Therefore, choosing January 2014 when the coverage became effective to define pre- and post-period is a conservative approach, which most likely would underestimate the effect size, and the actual differences in the increase of breast cancer incidence between high and low-SVI neighborhoods could be larger than what was found in our current analyses. Secondly, while we focused on non-elderly women aged between 20 and 64 years, as they were the targeted age group of Medicaid expansion, only those aged above 40 are recommended for breast cancer screening, which may be the primary mode to detect the early stage cancer. This was confirmed in part by the sensitivity analysis among screening eligible younger age (40–64) group, which showed similar findings as in the main analysis of age 20–64 group. Finally, our data are from California only, the results may not be generalizable to other states. However, it is of great importance to study the impact of Medicaid expansion in California, due to its unique features. For example, California has the highest proportion of Hispanics population (39%), and the second highest proportion of Asian population (18%), and had high Health Maintenance Organization penetration (59% vs. 32% nationally) [ 47 , 48 ]. Conclusion While Medicaid expansion is designed to improve insurance coverage at the individual level, its impact was also notable at the neighborhood level based on our analysis. We found that ACA’s Medicaid expansion had differential impact on breast cancer incidence rates across neighborhoods in California. The pre-post change of the incidence was significant when comparing neighborhoods with high and low social vulnerability, especially for localized cancer stage. The positive change, particularly in high vulnerability neighborhoods, may be related to increased health insurance coverage and the subsequent access and utilization of preventive care covered by the expanded Medicaid in California. Interventions with individual and place intersectionality may better improve early detection and reduce breast cancer mortality, and warrant further research. Supplementary Material Supplement Mateiral Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/10.1007/s10552-024-01893-1 .