Research from the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) hormone therapy randomized clinical trial and the Million Women Study (MWS) established estrogen plus progestin combination hormone therapy (EP-HT) as a risk factor for breast cancer among postmenopausal women. 1 , 2 The association between unopposed estrogen hormone therapy (E-HT) and risk of postmenopausal breast cancer is less certain. The WHI trial found an inverse association among women without a uterus, 3 but the MWS and a later collaborative group study 4 reported positive associations that increased with duration of use. Exposure to endogenous and exogenous estrogen or progesterone is generally thought to initiate or promote the growth of hormone-sensitive tumors, including most breast cancers. 5 Women may seek hormone therapy to manage symptoms related to natural or surgical menopause or other hormone-related conditions. 6 – 9 Natural menopause occurs at age 52, on average, 10 though women generally start experiencing vasomotor symptoms several years prior to their last menstrual period. 11 While women younger than 55 may therefore experience clinical benefits from hormone therapy, they represent a small proportion of those given a prescription. 12 Young women have been largely excluded from major studies of hormone therapy and breast cancer, so risks associated with pre- and perimenopausal hormone therapy use are not known. We aimed to address this research gap by investigating the association between hormone therapy use and incident young-onset breast cancer (YOBC), defined here as breast cancer diagnosed before age 55 years. We pooled individual-level data from prospective cohort studies participating in the Premenopausal Breast Cancer Collaborative Group 13 and investigated the association between type of hormone therapy (EP-HT, E-HT, others) and breast cancer incidence, overall and by breast cancer subtype, including considerations of how these associations differed by duration of use, age at first use, or gynecological surgery status. In secondary analyses, we examined associations within subgroups defined by age, menopausal status, body mass index (BMI), race, geographic region, birth cohort, and family history of breast cancer. The overall goal of this research was to provide empirical evidence that might be useful for informing clinical recommendations for younger women considering hormone therapy. Methods Study design The Premenopausal Breast Cancer Collaborative Group has harmonized and pooled data from females participating in prospective cohort studies who were younger than 55 years of age at enrollment and had not been previously diagnosed with breast cancer. Contributing studies represent populations in North America, Europe, Asia, and Australia. Since the group’s initial publications, 13 – 15 additional cohorts have been added, as have time-dependent covariate data and new incident cases, when available. Participating cohorts followed women for incident breast cancer until at least age 55 years. For this analysis of hormone therapy and breast cancer incidence, 13 cohorts met initial eligibility criteria. Of these, 10 provided data on type of hormone therapy (Black Women’s Health Study, 16 the Generations Study, 17 California Teachers’ Study 18 [CTS], Cancer Prevention Study 3, 19 Canadian Study of Diet, Lifestyle, and Health 20 [CSDLH], Campaign Against Cancer and Heart Disease 21 [CLUEII], Mayo Mammography Health Study, 22 Singapore Chinese Health Study, 23 Sister Study 24 [SIS], and US Radiologic Technologists Cohort 25 [USRTC]). Three others (Melbourne Collaborative Cohort Study, 26 Shanghai Women’s Health Study, 27 and Southern Community Cohort Study 28 ) provided data on ever versus never use, but not type. All participants provided study-specific written informed consent, and each cohort had approval and oversight by a relevant institutional review board. Participants From the 13 cohorts with data on hormone therapy use we excluded 8,946 participants (1.6%) whose data on hormone therapy use was missing, leaving 547,751 eligible women. Of these, 9,482 developed incident YOBC (median follow-up=7.8 years). In the subset of 10 cohorts with data on hormone therapy type, 459,476 women contributed data, including 8,455 with incident YOBC. One of the cohorts, CSDLH, provided data for a case-cohort sample (total n=1574, with 376 cases), which we weighted according to their inverse probability of selection into the sample (1.0 for cases, 23.1 for non-cases) to represent the original cohort. 29 Hormone Therapy Each of the included cohorts was asked to provide detailed information on hormone therapy use as of study enrollment, including current use (never, former, current, current non-user with unknown history), age at first use, age at last use, and total cumulative years of use. Cohorts with data on hormone therapy type were asked to harmonize responses into the following mutually exclusive categories: never use, E-HT only, EP-HT only, both E-HT and EP-HT, other hormone therapy (O-HT), and unknown. No additional information was collected for women who responded that they used “other” hormone therapy and cohorts were not asked to specify the route of administration (e.g. oral, transdermal, vaginal). We defined long-term users as those reporting more than two years of cumulative use, which was approximately half of users. In addition to providing information about hormone use prior to study enrollment, four of the cohorts (CTS, CLUEII, SIS, and USRTC) also provided data updating hormone use during follow-up. Pooling across these studies, we estimated the associations of time-varying hormone therapy use with YOBC. Incident YOBC All invasive or in situ breast cancers diagnosed after enrollment and before age 55 years were considered YOBC events. Many of the studies verified cases via cancer registries, 16 – 23 , 26 – 28 while others relied on self-report augmented by medical record validation. 24 , 30 Data on disease stage, estrogen receptor (ER) status, progesterone receptor (PR) status, and human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2) status were included, when possible. Follow-up was defined on the age time scale, starting at enrollment and continuing until YOBC event, with censoring at the minimum of age 55, loss to follow-up, cohort-defined end of follow-up, or death. Potential Confounders and Other Covariates Covariates were considered confounders if they were potentially causally related to YOBC and associated with, but not affected by, hormone therapy use. All were based on status at enrollment and included: age, attained education level (≤high school, some college, college graduate), body mass index (BMI; kg/m 2 , continuous), age at menarche (continuous), birth cohort (1928–1945, 1946–1954, 1955–1964, ≥1965), race (White, Black, Asian, or a category combining all other races), menopausal status (with postmenopausal defined as not having menstruated in at least 12 months), ever hysterectomy, ever bilateral oophorectomy, oral contraceptive use (never, former, current), number of births (0, 1, 2, ≥3), age at first birth (an interaction term with ever parous; age 20, 20–24, 25–29, 30–34, ≥35 years), and age at menopause (age at last menstrual period with a menopausal status interaction term; continuous). Because some of the covariates had high proportions of missingness ( Table 1 , Supplementary Table 1 ), we implemented multiple imputation with chained equations (MICE; SAS v9.4). All potential confounders were included in the imputation model, in addition to cohort, geographic location (North America, Europe, Asia/Australia), regular alcohol use (ever, never, as defined by study), first-degree family history of breast cancer, case status, and crude cumulative hazard estimates. 31 We also imputed breast cancer subtype (ER, PR and HER2 status) with these models, including for studies without tumor data. Statistical Analysis We examined covariate distributions in the pooled sample, first for the combined cohorts (weighted by inverse probability of sampling) and then separately among cases. Within the 10 cohorts with hormone therapy type data, we compared covariate distributions by hormone therapy type. Associations were initially assessed via random effects meta-analysis (implemented in R 4.4.0), 32 using Cox regression models to generate cohort-specific multivariable-adjusted hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). We adjusted for the above listed covariates, as defined at enrollment, plus a BMI by menopause status interaction term. 15 , 33 This was done with complete case analysis, but if a cohort was completely missing specific confounders, those covariates were omitted from the adjusted model. Study-specific HRs were combined via meta-analyses to assess effects of ever versus never hormone therapy use (all 13 cohorts) and type of hormone therapy relative to never use (10 cohorts). We used I 2 values and Cochran’s Q statistics to quantify heterogeneity across cohorts. We next estimated pooled hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the 10 cohorts with data on hormone therapy type (implemented in SAS v9.4). The HRs were averaged over 10 multiply imputed copies of the pooled data set using Rubin’s rules, 34 with verification that estimates remained consistent across multiple seeds. We calculated both age- and multivariable-adjusted HR estimates using cohort-stratified Cox regression models. In addition to hormone therapy type, we also considered duration of use (never, ≤2 years, 2 years), age at first use (never, 45, 45–49, ≥50), and current use (never, former, current), overall and by type. To further explore duration and age at initiation, we also considered models with interaction terms for ever use by continuous duration or ever use by continuous age. For each primary exposure comparison, we additionally estimated cumulative risk of YOBC and risk differences (RDs) at age 55. To implement this, we estimated the baseline hazard function using the Breslow method 35 and then compared cumulative risk estimates across exposure groups, assuming covariate distributions identical to those observed in our sample. We also considered factors that could potentially modify the association between E-HT or EP-HT and incident YOBC. We were particularly interested in gynecological surgery status, as women who undergo hysterectomy and/or oophorectomy often take hormone therapy, 8 , 36 , 37 though E-HT is contraindicated in women with a uterus due to its known link to increased risk of endometrial cancer. 38 Other potential modifiers of interest included age, menopausal status (accounting for changes over follow-up), overweight status among premenopausal women, race, geographic region, birth cohort (as a proxy for changes in prescribing patterns and decreases in standard dosages over time 4 , 12 , 39 , 40 ), and first-degree family history of breast cancer. We also estimated HRs for subsets of breast cancer cases defined by invasiveness ( in situ or invasive) and subtype (ER, PR, and/or HER2 status). Here, women with breast cancers that did not meet the case definition of interest were censored at diagnosis. Time-varying analyses Finally, we examined the association between time-varying hormone therapy use and YOBC across the 4 cohorts with data on use during follow-up. Because these cohorts had different follow-up intervals and lengths, we harmonized the data by generating a dataset with one observation per 2-year period per participant. For each participant’s initial period, their covariates were assigned based on enrollment data. If a new questionnaire was administered before the end of the 2-year period, the covariate values for the second cycle were updated, but if no new data were collected then prior values were carried forward. This was continued every 2 years until the end of follow-up. Because covariate values could not change until the follow-up cycle after a questionnaire, the prospective nature of the data was preserved. We again used Cox proportional hazards models to estimate pooled HRs and 95% CIs, this time stratifying baseline hazard functions by both follow-up period (i.e., 2-year interval) and cohort. We first estimated the association between YOBC and time-varying hormone therapy type, relative to never use. Next, we looked at current hormone therapy use by type, where current use was defined by use during the last 2 years. Here, we additionally adjusted for ever prior hormone therapy use as a potential confounder. Lastly, we considered duration of hormone therapy use by type and age at start of use by type, updating as needed for new or ongoing users. Role of the funding source The funding sources had no role in the design, conduct, or interpretation of the study. Results Most of the participants included in the 10 cohorts with hormone therapy type data identified as White (79%) and lived in North America (82%) or Europe (15%) ( Table 1 ). They ranged in age from 16–54 (mean=42.0, interquartile range [IQR]=35.5–55.0) years at enrollment. Women who developed YOBC during follow-up tended to be slightly younger at enrollment (mean age=40.7 years, IQR=35.3–46.5) and were less likely to be postmenopausal (14% versus 21% overall). Women born 1955–1964 made up the largest group (33%; 44% of cases), followed closely by those born after 1964 (32%; 18% of cases). Overall, 15% of women reported a first-degree family history of breast cancer, including 24% of cases. Fifteen percent of the sample reported ever using hormone therapy prior to enrollment (currently or formerly), with 6% reporting EP-HT only, 5% E-HT only, 2% both E-HT and EP-HT, 1% hormone therapy other than E-HT or EP-HT (O-HT), and 1% unknown type. Among cases, 11% reported having used hormone therapy (3% E-HT, 4% EP-HT, 1% both E-HT and EP-HT, 2% O-HT, and 1% unknown type). E-HT users were more likely to have had a hysterectomy (72%) or bilateral oophorectomy with or without hysterectomy (50%) than non-hormone therapy users (7% and 1%, respectively; Supplementary Table 2 ). Mean duration of use was 4.7 years (IQR:1.0–7.0) and mean age at initiation was 42.2 years (IQR:39.0–47.0). EP-HT users were also more likely to have had hysterectomies (16%) or bilateral oophorectomies (12%) than non-users. Mean duration of EP-HT use was 3.3 years (IQR:1.0–4.0) and mean age at initiation was 44.2 years (IQR:40.0–50.0). In the meta-analysis of all 13 cohorts ( Supplementary Table 3 , Supplementary Figure 1 ), ever use of any hormone therapy was not associated with incident YOBC (meta-HR=1.03, 95% CI: 0.94–1.11), with no evidence of heterogeneity across cohorts (heterogeneity p-value=0.23). In analyses that pooled data from the 10 cohorts with type data, ever use was inversely associated with YOBC in age-adjusted models (HR=0.87, 0.82–0.94), but the estimate attenuated with covariate adjustment (HR=0.96, 0.88–1.04; Table 2 ). When we considered hormone therapy type, relative to never use of any type, E-HT was inversely associated with YOBC (pooled, covariate-adjusted HR=0.86, 0.75–0.98). This corresponded to a RD of −0.5% (−1.0, −0.0), relative to an estimated cumulative risk of 4.1% for non-users. For EP-HT the HR was 1.10 (0.98–1.24) and the RD was 0.4% (−0.1, 0.9). HRs for O-HT (HR=0.88, 0.74–1.04) or both E-HT and EP-HT (HR=0.88, 0.71–1.10) were below 1.0 but statistically imprecise. Relative to never E-HT users, inverse associations were most evident for longer-term users (HR=0.80, 0.66–0.96 for 2 years), earlier initiators (HR=0.77, 0.65–0.92 for age 45) and former users (HR=0.77, 0.62–0.97). Longer duration of use also amplified the positive EP-HT and YOBC association (HR=1.18, 1.01–1.38 for 2 years), as did current use (HR=1.21, 1.06–1.38). In models with interaction terms for continuous duration or age at use, only the E-HT-by-duration term indicated a consistent trend (HR=0.98, 0.96–1.00 per year of use). Post-imputation, cohort-specific HRs for hormone therapy by type are included in Supplementary Table 4 . For E-HT, associations were similar for all categories of gynecological surgery ( Table 3 ), but for EP-HT we noted stronger positive associations among women without surgery (HR=1.15, 1.02–1.31; RD=0.6%; −0.0, 1.2). These patterns remained consistent in analyses jointly considering surgical status and hormone therapy relative to a common referent group of no surgery, no hormone therapy ( Supplementary Table 5 ). HR estimates for E-HT or EP-HT and YOBC associations were largely similar across categories of menopausal status, age, BMI, race, geographic region, and birth year ( Table 3 ). We observed possible differences by first-degree family history of breast cancer, with E-HT showing a stronger inverse association among women with ≥1 affected relative (HR=0.77, 0.60–1.00) and EP-HT showing a stronger positive association among women without an affected relative (HR=1.17, 1.02–1.34). E-HT was inversely associated with most subtypes of breast cancer ( Table 4 ). However, for EP-HT, positive associations were observed for ER-negative (HR=1.44, 1.11–1.88) and triple-negative (HR=1.50, 1.02–2.20) YOBC. In analyses where covariate information was updated throughout follow-up, estimates for ever E-HT were consistent with those assuming no covariate changes (HR=0.86, 0.73–1.01; Table 5 , compared to HR=0.86, 0.75–0.98 initially), as were estimates for EP-HT (HR=1.06, 0.93–1.21 versus HR=1.10, 0.98–1.24). The other HRs from time-updated analyses were also generally consistent with the original estimates, including a strong inverse association for E-HT use age 45 (HR=0.79, 0.65–0.97) and YOBC. Discussion In this large analysis that pooled data from 10 cohorts, we observed an inverse association between ever use of E-HT and incident breast cancer diagnosed before age 55, which was consistent across breast cancer subtypes and was potentially stronger with earlier or longer-term use. In contrast, EP-HT was positively associated with YOBC, particularly among longer-term users and women with no history of gynecologic surgery. The positive EP-HT and YOBC association may be specific to ER– (including triple-negative) breast cancers. Our results parallel those previously reported for the WHI clinical trials conducted among postmenopausal women. Specifically, Anderson et al. (2004) 3 reported an inverse association between E-HT and invasive breast cancer risk among hysterectomized women aged 50–79 (mean=64) years (HR=0.77, 0.59–1.01), which persisted in a re-analysis that incorporated additional follow-up (HR=0.77, 0.62–0.95). 41 Among women aged 50–59 at randomization, the HR was 0.80 (0.54–1.20). Given that a large proportion of E-HT users in our pooled sample had also undergone hysterectomy (with or without bilateral oophorectomy), the combined evidence supports that there may be health benefits, at least in terms of breast cancer risk, of using exogenous estrogen to replace depleted endogenous estrogen. The inverse associations observed among women who started E-HT at younger ages or who used it for longer durations lends further support to the idea that women who undergo menopause earlier, either naturally or surgically, may derive the most benefit from estrogen replacement. In the WHI trial of EP-HT versus placebo, EP-HT use was associated with an increase in postmenopausal invasive breast cancer in the initial report (HR=1.26, 1.00–1.59) 1 and after extended follow-up (HR=1.24, 1.01–1.53). 42 While older than our pooled sample, these participants had a uterus at enrollment. Thus, the trial results are most comparable to our results for women with no prior gynecologic surgery, a group where we too observed an elevated HR. Altogether, this suggests that among women with stable or naturally declining hormone levels, exogenous estrogen may be carcinogenic, 5 with exogenous progestin also potentially playing an antagonistic role. 43 The positive association we observed for EP-HT and ER-negative or triple-negative breast cancer, specifically, is a novel finding that deserves further exploration, 44 but if replicated could help us better understand the role of hormones in initiating or promoting the growth of even hormone receptor-negative tumors. In the MWS, 2 past use of hormone therapy (any type) was not associated with breast cancer incidence (relative risk [RR]= 1.01, 0.95–1.08). In contrast, current use of either E-HT (RR=1.30, 1.22–1.38) or EP-HT (RR=2.00, 1.91–2.09) versus never use of any type, was associated with increased risk. However, critiques of the study have theorized that the positive associations were largely driven by over-selection of current hormone therapy users and women with known breast abnormalities seeking screening, as demonstrated by the short average time to diagnosis (1.2 years). 45 , 46 Similar patterns of increased screening may have contributed to the elevated HR for current HT-EP users in our sample as well, though the stronger HR for EP-HT and YOBC in women without a breast cancer family history goes against this assumption. A multi-study collaborative group analysis of postmenopausal women that included the MWS also reported evidence for a positive association between duration of E-HT and EP-HT use and incident breast cancer among both current and past users. 4 However, a supplementary analysis of the collaborative group data produced findings similar to those observed here for cancer diagnosed before age 55, albeit with lower statistical precision (5–14 years of current E-HT use versus never, relative risk= 0.95, 0.80–1.12; 5–14 years of current EP-HT use versus never, relative risk=1.71, 1.45–2.03). Some additional discrepancies in findings across studies may be attributable to differences in risk factors for younger versus later-onset breast cancer. This pattern is well-documented for BMI, which is inversely associated with premenopausal breast cancer but positively associated with postmenopausal breast cancer. 15 , 47 Then again, our results were not entirely consistent with 3 small case-control studies of young-onset breast cancer. 48 – 50 While Shantakumar et al. 48 also reported positive associations with risk of premenopausal breast cancer for EP-HT or mixed regimens, they did not observe inverse associations for E-HT and premenopausal breast cancer. In a sister-matched case-control study, 50 a statistically non-significant inverse association was observed for EP-HT and breast cancer diagnosed before age 50, but, as with the current pooled analysis, the E-HT association was strongly inverse (Odds Ratio [OR]=0.58, 0.34–0.99). Palmer et al. 49 did not observe inverse associations for E-HT and breast cancer before age 50. Strengths and Limitations YOBC and hormone use before age 55 are both uncommon, and pooling individual level data from multiple cohorts allowed us to conduct well-powered, comprehensive analyses with adjustment for potential confounding factors beyond what could have been accomplished with a single study or meta-analysis. However, harmonizing data across cohorts has inherent limitations, including the need to align exposure metrics with the least detailed study(s). For example, although some studies provided hormone therapy dose, it was not consistently collected, and we could not capture type-specific data for women who reported multiple types. We employed multiple imputation to account for missing data, including missing hormone therapy type, but this approach was limited by the covariate information available and data on hysterectomy, oophorectomy, or oral contraceptive use was sparse in some studies. Although only a small proportion of participants were classified as O-HT users, we lacked detail on whether these women could have been classified to specific categories of hormone therapy (e.g., progestin alone or tibolone) that are potentially of interest. We also lacked data on indications for use, which may have allowed us to better disentangle the independent effects of hormone therapy from gynecologic surgery status or other co-exposures, and on progestin/estrogen type or route of administration, which varies by population and may impact hormonal absorption. 40 , 51 Lastly, we note that most cohorts only provided data on hormone therapy status up until enrollment, meaning that women who started using hormone therapy after baseline but before age 55 were miscategorized as unexposed throughout follow-up. However, results from the secondary analyses conducted among the 4 cohorts with time-updated data were largely consistent with the main findings. Because the majority of cohorts only provided information on hormone use at the time of enrollment, these data were ill-suited for target trial emulation 52 or other approaches to modeling the effects of drug initiation. Bias from unmeasured or poorly measured confounders may be present. We did not adjust for alcohol use or physical activity because the included cohorts had heterogeneous definitions and data quality for these factors. Further, while we adjusted for attained education, this has different meanings across countries and cohorts and is likely insufficient to fully control for confounding by socioeconomic position, a likely correlate of hormone therapy use. Lastly, we did not have data on BRCA1 / 2 or other known breast cancer predisposition genes and could not evaluate whether any of the observed associations were modified by genetic factors. We initially included cohorts from 4 continents and many countries, but the final pooled sample was predominantly White women from North America. Therefore, these results may not be generalizable to all groups. Additional studies on women from other continents and ancestries are warranted, as are studies of women from more recent birth cohorts or with greater socioeconomic disadvantage. Studies of these groups would also add information on different hormone regimens and use patterns. The major strengths of this analysis were the large sample size and detailed data enabling an examination of hormone therapy type and subtypes of YOBC, accounting for many known confounders and effect modifiers. The time-varying analyses, though limited to data from 4 cohorts, are also an important strength, as these help to bolster the results of the original analysis and offer some additional insights. Young women may use hormone therapy to relieve symptoms from hormone-related conditions, menopause, or gynecologic surgery, but the risks and benefits of doing so have not been thoroughly investigated. In this large collaborative study of hormone therapy use and breast cancer incidence among younger women, we observed an inverse association for ever use of E-HT and breast cancer before age 55. EP-HT was modestly positively associated with YOBC rates, and the observed stronger association among women who had not had a hysterectomy or bilateral oophorectomy deserves further consideration given that E-HT is contraindicated in women with a uterus. Altogether, the results of this large-scale investigation, in conjunction with mostly consistent results from prior studies of postmenopausal women, provide key information that may be useful for establishing clinical recommendations regarding hormone therapy use in young women. Supplementary Material Supplementary Material