Introduction Over the past three decades, educational health inequalities have grown in the United States ( Liu and Hummer 2008 ; Montez et al. 2021 ; Montez and Zajacova 2013 ). These inequalities have grown despite decades of public health research and increased public concern. Widening education health inequalities are not limited to specific a condition or conditions. It has been observed across several later life health conditions, such as cancer, cardiovascular disease, disability, and mortality, that have far-reaching implications for older adult health and wellbeing ( Cantu et al. 2019 ; Kinsey et al. 2008 ; Liu and Hummer 2008 ; Montez and Bisesti 2024 ; Montez and Zajacova 2013 ). However, the population dynamics underlying widening inequalities are not uniform across conditions. Education-specific trends reveal notable heterogeneity. Health inequalities can be driven by strong improvements concentrated among people with a college education (i.e. cardiovascular disease), substantial declines among people with high school or less (i.e. diabetes), or a combination of these two trends (i.e. mortality and disability) ( Cantu et al. 2019 ; Geiss et al. 2014 ; Kinsey et al. 2008 ; Lawrence et al. 2018 ; Liu and Hummer 2008 ; Menke et al. 2015 :201; Sasson and Hayward 2019 ; Schellekens and Ziv 2020 ; Singh et al. 2015 ; Withrow et al. 2021 ). Underlying several of these conditions may be growing differences in biological risk but given the significant heterogeneity in trends, a clear prediction is obscured. While prior research has shown lower biological risk in the U.S. population in recent decades ( Kim et al. 2019 ; Levine and Crimmins 2018 ), improvements in biological risk may not be equal across education groups. Understanding how educational differences in biological risk have changed may provide additional insight into how and why educational disparities in health are persistent and continue to grow in the United States. Advancements in Geroscience have led to the development and application of biological summary measures to evaluate overall age-related health of individuals and populations ( Belsky et al. 2015 , 2018 ; Crimmins et al. 2021a :20; Kennedy et al. 2014 ; Levine 2013 ). These measures have been used to better understand how aging processes contribute to inequalities in age-related health across individuals and groups. To explain, chronological age has been identified as one of the most important risk factors for older adult health ( Levine 2013 ). However, significant variability in age-related health outcomes exists across individuals and groups at similar chronological ages, pointing to differences in the rate of aging as a key biological risk that can lead to health inequalities (i.e. those with faster aging have greater risk of developing adverse age-related health outcomes compared to those with slower aging) ( Liu et al. 2019 ; Parker et al. 2019 ). To this end, researchers have developed biological aging measures to capture increases in biological risk associated with accelerated aging. Additionally, these measures are also thought to capture subclinical or preclinical presentations of age-related diseases years or decades before the onset and diagnosis or complaint of clinical symptoms ( Fabbri et al. 2014 ; Ferrucci et al. 2019 ). Biological age is one of the most widely used biological risk measures in social science and population health research. Biological aging refers to the gradual deterioration of physiological, cellular and molecular processes associated with aging that undermine health through the loss of system integrity, leading to an increased risk in morbidity, disability and mortality at older chronological ages ( Boen et al. 2023 ; Ferrucci et al. 2019 ). Methodologically, prior research has used multi-system composite measures of overall physiological functioning that are strongly associated with age-related health outcomes such as multimorbidity, disability and death ( Crimmins et al. 2021a ; Levine 2013 ; Levine and Crimmins 2014 ). Biological age is built on a set of clinically relevant biomarkers linked to health and aging. Additionally, to differentiate risks of individuals and groups at similar chronological ages, researchers have either calculated or estimated accelerated or decelerated aging by accounting for the difference between an individual’s biological and chronological age ( Levine 2013 ; Liu et al. 2019 ). For example, a 50-year-old who has a biological age of 60 will be classified as having accelerated aging, which puts him at greater risk of developing age-related health conditions than others of a similar chronological age who are younger “biologically.” Regarding education, adults with higher levels of education have slower biological aging than adults with lower levels of education ( Crimmins et al. 2021b ; Farina et al. 2022 ; Seeman et al. 2008 ). Biological aging is, thus, thought to be a potentially important mechanism by which educational inequalities in health are established. Therefore, understanding how educational inequalities in biological aging have increased over time may provide additional insight into growing health inequalities in the United States. To this end, building on earlier work that has shown a deceleration in biological aging in the U.S. population ( Levine and Crimmins 2018 ), we use the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), a nationally representative study of U.S. adults, to examine changes in educational inequality in biological aging for adults aged 50–79 from 1988–1994 to 2015–2018. We also examine whether these changes are sensitive to the inclusion of other health factors that are important contributors to changes in the U.S. health over the last 30 years, which include smoking, obesity, and cholesterol and hypertension medication use. Our research contributes to ongoing scientific inquiry into educational disparities in health by examining whether changes in biological aging accompany growing health inequalities in physical health. Background Education, Health, and Biological Aging in the United States Educational disparities in health in the United States cannot be overstated. People with higher levels of education have better mental, physical, psychological, and cognitive health ( Cantu et al. 2019 ; Farina et al. 2020 ; Luo and Waite 2005 ; Montez and Bisesti 2024 ; Montez and Zajacova 2013 ; Sasson and Hayward 2019 ). The mechanisms that link higher levels of education to health are multiple, overlapping, flexible, and complementary. Social scientists and health researchers uncovered mechanisms that include social networks ( Smith and Christakis 2008 ), occupational opportunities ( Ross and Wu 1995 ), wealth accumulation ( Ross and Wu 1995 ), health literacy ( Chandola et al. 2006 ), access to technology and knowledge, and living and working environments ( Ross and Mirowsky 1999 ), among many others. Others have also pointed to cumulative physiological “wear and tear” (or the Weathering Hypothesis) that individuals in disadvantaged position face ( Geronimus et al. 2019 ). As shown above, adults living in poverty (often associated with lower levels of education) may experience substantial challenges throughout life that would lead to this cumulative wear and tear, resulting in faster biological aging. In total, the pervasiveness by which education structures life opportunities, risks, and rewards that influence health has led health researchers to classify education a key social determinant of health ( Baker et al. 2017 ; Link and Phelan 1995 ; Low et al. 2005 ; Masters et al. 2015 ; Phelan et al. 2010 ). It is also for this reason that the association between education and biological aging cannot be reduced to one domain but rather expands across several of them. Biological aging in older adulthood reflects a combination of life experiences, of which many are structured by education. Thus, biological aging can be viewed as an important health indicator of educational advantage or disadvantage and may also be a mechanism by which education shapes older adult health and wellbeing ( Graf et al. 2024 ). Despite persistent health inequalities in education, the underlying differences between education groups may change over time and across contexts. That is, the relationship between education and health is dynamic, with the extent to which education impacts health shaped by larger social context ( Hayward Farina 2023 ). For example, in the United States, education is one of the primary stratification systems that reflect, create, and reinforce social inequalities. Educational attainment and family socioeconomic conditions are strongly associated, with people from more resource-rich environments achieving greater levels of education ( Fergusson et al. 2008 ). Educational attainment also shapes occupational opportunities that come with distinct benefits and socioeconomic resources. These processes may be shaped by larger sociohistorical changes. Educational expansion in the 20 th century created upward mobility, in which people from more modest familial backgrounds were able to obtain greater levels of education. However, towards the end of the 20 th century, the value of a high school diploma eroded, as evidenced in the decline in benefits-rich blue-collar occupations ( Aaviksoo and Kiivet 2014 ), decline in real wages ( Massenkoff and Wilmers 2023 ), and increased barriers to entry-level jobs with stable employment that required a college degree. Thus, the changing meaning of education across time in terms of how it reproduces and shapes life opportunities is likely reflected in changing educational inequalities in health and biological risk. Growing educational inequalities in mortality are a prime example of how population trends in education and health are dynamic. While educational inequality in mortality has been increasing since the mid-20 th century, it was only recently that part of the increase could be attributed to the decline or stagnation in mortality rates of people without a college degree ( Case and Deaton 2021 ; Montez and Zajacova 2013 ; Sasson 2016 ). While the “causes” of increasing inequality have been widely debated, from evaluating selection processes to changing meaning of education in globalized late capitalism, and the defederalization and cutting back of social welfare programs, U.S. population trends are clear. Compared to recent historical periods, today, those without a college are further behind than those with a college education. Understanding how the association between educational attainment and biological aging has changed over the same period can provide further insight into potential mechanisms that may contribute to alarming increases in health inequalities across education groups and point to potential areas of intervention to reduce them. Changing Health Behavior/Medication Profiles of the U.S. Population To understand current and potential future U.S. health trends, population health scholars have turned to smoking and obesity as important risk factors that have contributed to changes in U.S. population health in recent decades ( Preston et al. 2013 ). Smoking has been linked to premature mortality, several morbidities, and greater disability. It is also one of the strongest observed risk factors for biological risk ( Klopack et al. 2022 ), including accelerated biological aging ( Mamoshina et al. 2019 ). Smoking has a clear education gradient: people with higher levels of education are less likely to smoke than people with lower levels of education ( Nguyen-Grozavu et al. 2020 ). From 1964–2012, declines in smoking in the United States have been associated with substantial increases in life expectancy ( Holford et al. 2014 ), but the contribution to improvements across education groups may differ. While smoking has decreased in the overall population, people with higher levels of education stopped or never started to smoke at greater rates than people with lower levels of education ( Cao et al. 2023 ). By the 1990s, college educated adults already had low rates of smoking, especially when compared to people with high school or less ( Cao et al. 2023 ). Therefore, changes in smoking across education groups may have not contributed to growing inequalities in health that started in the 1990s but may have beeen a countervailing trend. That is, any substantial decrease in smoking in the U.S. population most likely stemmed from people without a college degree, which would have then contributed to better health profile for this group and potentially attenuate the increasing educational inequality. Additionally, public health scholars have raised the alarm about the obesogenic environment in the United States, especially as it relates to inaccessibility to healthy foods and sedentary lifestyles ( Patterson et al. 2004 ; Townshend and Lake 2017 ). Obesity prevalence among U.S. adults has grown from 30.5% in 1999 to 41.9% in 2017 ( CDC 2022 ). Obesity has been linked to faster aging ( Jura and Kozak 2016 ; Monteverde et al. 2010 ; Salvestrini et al. 2019 ) and greater risk of diabetes, heart disease, and mortality ( Agborsangaya et al. 2013 ; Kivimäki et al. 2017 ; Samper-Ternent and Snih 2012 ; Tzanetakou et al. 2012 ). Prior research has found that people with higher levels of education in the United States are less likely to be obese ( Cohen et al. 2013 ). However, recent studies have found that US adults with 13–15 years of education had the fastest growth in obesity in the past two decades ( Inoue et al. 2018 ), which may attenuate growing educational inequalities in biological aging. It is also important to note that while obesity as a health outcome or risk factor for health has been widely contested for individuals due to potential confounders (such as a proxy for diet and exercise), measurement error, and generalizability across population subgroups ( Stokes and Preston 2016 ), obesity continues to be used in many public health studies to evaluate changes in population risk – but it should not be interpreted as causal in this study. It has also been strongly associated with population health outcomes at large ( Mehta 2023 ). Therefore, in this study, we evaluate the sensitivity of widening inequality of biological aging across education groups to the inclusion of obesity, considering it an important public health risk factor and proxy for overall change in population health risk. Lastly, public health researchers have pointed to the importance of cholesterol and hypertension medication usage in the United States to manage biological risk and prevent age-related health complications, which may have directly improved cardiovascular health over the last two decades ( Wadhera et al. 2016 ). Since the 1990s, the use of these medications has rapidly increased in the U.S. population due to a variety of factors that include changes in the definition of hypertension and high cholesterol that lead to greater perscriptions ( Gao et al. 2023 ; Gu et al. 2012 ; Salami et al. 2017 ; Zhou et al. 2019 ). In fact, prior research, on which this study directly builds, shows medication use was strongly associated with the changes in biological aging in the U.S. population ( Levine and Crimmins 2018 ). However, the influence that differences in medication use have on changing educational inequalities remains unclear. Education differences in medication use are not well-documented. But, people with greater levels of education may obtain and better comply with medication-based treatments to lower their overall health risks. Overall, the incorporation of smoking, obesity, and medication use into this study provides an opportunity to evaluate whether major population changes in health risks from behaviors and medical treatment are associated with widening educational inequalities in health. Understanding how biological risk, as indicated by biological aging, has changed in the United States alongside these population trends may provide greater insight into why biological risk may be changing unevenly across education groups. Materials and Methods Study Population Data came from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) from 1988–1994 and from 2015–2018. NHANES was designed to evaluate health and nutrition status of adults and children in the United States, from which population and public health researchers could evaluate national health trends. Each wave of the NHANES data is cross-sectional and nationally representative of the non-institutionalized U.S. population at the time of study. Data were collected from at-home interviews or at mobile examination centers. Lastly, NHANES is one of the few nationally representative datasets that collected biomarker information in the 1990s, allowing us to evaluate increasing inequality in biological aging within the same period that other substantial increases in health inequalities have occurred. In total, the analytical sample is comprised of 9701 adults ages 50 to 79 (5415 from 1988–1994 and 4286 from 2015–2018). Participants were limited to these ages for two reasons. First, health outcomes strongly associated with biological aging begin to increase after age 50. Therefore, biological aging trends in this age group may provide better insight into population health trends observed for age-related health outcomes. Second, biomarkers are less reliable at predicting health outcomes among adults aged 80 and over because biomarker levels begin to plateau after age 80 ( Bai 2018 ; Yashin et al. 2013 ). In addition to age restrictions, respondents also need to provide complete information on biomarkers, education, gender, race and/or ethnicity, smoking, BMI (body mass index), and medication use. Measures Accelerated (Decelerated) Biological Age Biological age is derived from the Klemera-Doubal algorithm ( Klemera and Doubal 2006 ; Levine 2013 ), which has been used in other biological aging studies using nationally representative datasets that include the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) and NHANES ( Crimmins et al. 2021a ; Farina et al. 2022 ; Graf et al. 2022 ; Levine 2013 ; Liu et al. 2019 ). The K-D equation is as follows: B A = ∑ j = 1 m x j − q j k j s j 2 + C A s B A 2 ∑ j = 1 m k j s j 2 + 1 s B A 2 In this equation, information from each of the j biomarkers is combined to produce biological age, x j represents each respondent’s measured biomarker, q j represents the intercept, k j represents the slope, and s j is the root mean squared error for each biomarker. Lastly, S B A 2 is the variance for the differences between the respondent’s biological and chronological age. The biological estimate produced is linearly related to chronological age, with an intercept at 0 and a slope of 1. The mean biological age equals the mean chronological age in the analytical sample. In our measure of biological aging, we are using 8 biomarkers that are related to aging and health outcomes. These include Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), total cholesterol, serum creatinine, systolic blood pressure, alkaline-phosphate, albumin, C-reative protein (CRP), and Blood Urea Nitrogen (BUN). These biomarkers span multiple systems, including metabolic, cardiovascular, inflammatory, kidney, liver, and lung functioning. Compared to an earlier study using NHANES data and biological aging, we are unable to include lung function or CMV because it was not collected for all the survey years used in this study (Levine and Crimmins 2017). We found a relatively-high correlation (0.61) between the measure used in this study and the measure used by Levine and Crimmins. Nonetheless, there is no standard set of indicators for biomarker selection, and we continued to abide by the key concept behind biological aging in that it is a multi-system indicator of aging. Lastly, to evaluate accelerated or delayed aging, we subtracted chronological age from biological age, which provided either a negative or positive value. Negative values indicate decelerated biological aging, whereas positive values indicate accelerated biological aging. Education Education categories were based on number of years of schooling. We created three categories: 0 to 11 years of education, 12–15 years of education, and 16 or more years of education. The education categories correspond to those who did not complete high school (0–11), those who completed high school but did not obtain a Bachelor’s degree (12–15), and those who obtained a Bachelor’s degree (16 or more years education). Population Health Risks: Smoking, Obesity, and Medication Use Smoking status was derived from two questions. First, respondents were asked if they had smoked “at least 100 cigarettes during your lifetime?” Second, respondents were asked “Do you currently smoke cigarettes?” Participants were classified into three categories: (1) current smokers if they answered yes to both questions, (2) former smokers if they reported smoking at least 100 cigarettes during their lifetime, but did not currently smoke, and (3) never smokers if they answered no to both questions. We used BMI to measure obesity status, which was calculated from measured weight (kg) divided by measured height (meters) squared. Participants with a BMI of 30 or greater were classified as obese. Medication use was determined by self-reports. Respondents were asked if they were currently taking medication for high blood pressure and high cholesterol. Other Covariates We adjusted for gender, age, and race and/or ethnicity in each equation, so that changes in biological age do not reflect changes in the demographic composition (i.e. changes in proportion and coefficient for race and/or ethnic groups). Gender was self-reported: male or female. Race and/or ethnicity was categorized into non-Hispanic White, non-Hispanic Black, Hispanic, and Other. It is also important to note that Hispanic older adults in the NHANES are largely reflective of adults of Mexican origin. Age was measured in years based on birth and interview date. Statistical Analysis First, we calculated change in biological age acceleration for each education group between 1988–1994 and 2015–2018. Second, we examined how health behaviors and medication use changed from 1988–1994 to 2015–2018 for each education group to understand how these important population health risk factors changed over this period. Third, we estimated a series of linear regression equations to evaluate how differences in biological aging by education group changed over this period and, if they are sensitive, to the inclusion of smoking, obesity, and medication use. In total, we presented results for three models. The first model showed changes in biological aging between 1988–1994 and 2015–2018, adjusting for race and/or ethnicity, gender, and age. The second model added education and an interaction term between education and time period. The third model added health behaviors and medication use. The full equation is as follows: B i o A G E A c c e l e r a t i o n = β 0 + β 1 ( A g e ) + β 2 ( G e n d e r ) + β 3 ( R a c e a n d / o r E t h n i c i t y ) + β 4 ( T i m e P e r i o d ) + β 5 ( E d u c a t i o n L e v e l ) + β 6 ( E d u c a t i o n L e v e l * T i m e P e r i o d ) + β 7 ( S m o k i n g B e h a v i o r ) + β 8 ( O b e s i t y ) + β 9 ( C h o l e s t e r o l M e d i c a t i o n U s e ) + β 10 ( H y p e r t e n s i o n M e d i c a t i o n U s e ) + ε Lastly, we estimated education-stratified linear regression models to examine the associations of smoking, obesity, and medication use with biological age acceleration for each education group to evaluate whether the associations with biological aging differed across education groups. We also completed two supplementary analyses. First, we show a table where an adjustment for race and/or ethnicity is not included. Patterns presented in this study remained largely unchanged (see Supplementary Table 1 ). Second, we included an adjustment for health insurance status. Results were also unchanged (see Supplementary Table 2 ). Analysis was completed using SAS 9.4. All models were adjusted for non-response, sampling probability, and complex survey design using the designated survey weights provided by NHANES, which also produces nationally representative estimates. Results Sample Characteristics Analytical sample descriptive information is presented in Table 1 . The mean chronological age was 62.3 years of age. 53.1% were female. The majority of the sample had 12–15 years of education (52.1%); about a quarter of respondents had 16+ years of education (23.7%) and 0–11 years of education (24.2%). Most of the respondents were non-Hispanic White (77.2%), with non-Hispanic Black making up 8.8%, Hispanic making up 8.6%, and Other making up 5.4% of the analytical sample. Approximately a third of the respondents were obese (35.5%). Most respondents had either never smoked cigarettes (45.6%) or stopped smoking (36.3%). 18.1% were current smokers. Lastly, 33.6% were taking anti-hypertensive medication and 18.8% were taking cholesterol-lowering medication. Table 1 shows changes in accelerated biological aging, demographic characteristics, health behaviors and medication use between 1988–1994 and 2015–2018. Mean accelerated biological age changed from 0.6 in 1988–1994 to −0.7 in 2015–2018, showing substantial biological aging deceleration over the period. Compared to the 1988–1994 period, in 2015–2018, respondents were slightly younger, had higher levels of education (especially 16+ years of schooling), were less likely to be non-Hispanic White, more likely to be classified as obese, more likely to have never smoked, and more likely to use hypertension or cholesterol lowering medication. Differences in Accelerated Biological Aging Mean differences in biological aging by education group and historical period after adjusting for age and gender are presented in Figure 1 . In the 1988–1994 period, respondents with 0–11 years of education and 12–15 years of education had accelerated biological aging (1.1 and 0.4 years, respectively). Respondents with 16+ years of education had, on average, no biological age acceleration. In the 2015–2018 period, only respondents with 0–11 years of education had accelerated biological aging (0.4 years of biological age acceleration). Respondents with 12–15 years of education were on average 0.5 years younger, while respondents with 16+ years of education were on average 1.5 years younger. Mean differences show two notable patterns. First, all education groups experienced improvements in their biological age from 1988–1994 to 2015–2018. Second, despite improvements for each group, educational inequality in accelerated biological aging increased. The difference in accelerated biological aging between the highest and lowest education groups widened from 1.1 years in 1988–1994 to 1.9 years in 2015–2018. Changes in Health Behaviors and Medication Use by Education Group Next, we evaluated changes in health behaviors and medication use by education group (shown in Table 2 ). Altogether, we found mixed results, with no clear indication of population trends that would favor well-educated older adults. For obesity, the education gradient in obesity among older adults eroded over the period, due to substantial increases in obesity among those with 12–15 years of education and 16+ years of education. For smoking, improvements in smoking behavior were mostly concentrated among respondents with 16+ years of education: never smokers increased from 45.7% to 65.2%, while current smokers decreased from 12% to 6%. Other education groups saw more attenuated changes, with similar absolute decreases in percentage points of current smokers. However, these decreases represented a smaller percentage change for the group due to higher prevalence in the earlier period. Lastly, hypertension and cholesterol medication use increased substantially for all education groups. Altogether, while changes in health behavior and medication use have implications for the overall population, these population dynamics most likely did not contribute to widening educational inequalities in biological aging. Period Change in Biological Aging and the Educational Differences Results from regression models show growing educational inequality in biological aging that was not sensitive to inclusion of health behaviors and medication use (see Table 3 ). Model 1 shows a deceleration in biological aging by 1.4 years (p .001) when comparing 2015–2018 to 1988–1994, which is similar to findings from an earlier study ( Levine and Crimmins 2018 ). Model 2 shows slower biological aging for people with higher levels of education. As expected, higher levels of education are associated with slower biological aging. In Model 3, we tested whether changes in biological aging differed by education group through an interaction term between education and time. When compared to respondents with 0–11 years of education, we found evidence that people with 16 or more years of education had a faster decline in accelerated aging (b=−0.73, p .05). While the coefficient was also negative for those with 12–15 years, it was not statistically significant. Model 4 added health behaviors and medication use. The coefficient for the interaction term between 16+ years and time remained relatively unchanged, while the interaction term between 12–15 years and time became marginally significant (b=−0.51, p .10). These results provide evidence that health behaviors and medication usage most likely did not contribute to widening educational inequalities in biological aging. Links Between Biological Aging and Health Behaviors/Medication Use by Education Group Lastly, we examined the association of health behaviors and medication use on biological aging within education group (shown in Table 4 ). Covariate patterns are consistent across groups. Model 1 shows slower biological aging for all three groups, with the largest change among people with 16+ years of schooling. Model 2 shows a positive and strong association between obesity status and accelerated biological aging across education groups. Model 3 shows no statistically significant association between smoking status and accelerated biological aging for any education group. Model 4 shows a positive association between taking hypertension medication with accelerated biological aging for all education groups, and a positive association between taking cholesterol medication and accelerated biological aging for the 16 or more years of education group. In the final adjusted model, all covariate patterns remained the same but the magnitude of difference in biological aging with time increased from Model 1 to Model 5 across all three groups, providing evidence that rising obesity rates and increased medication use (most likely indicative of underlying health conditions) are countervailing trends for all three groups. In other words, if obesity and medication usage had remained stagnant, each education group would have seen a greater deceleration in biological aging across the period. Discussion Since the1990s, increasing inequality in health across education groups in the United States has raised public health concerns. People with lower levels of education are falling further behind, posing significant challenges for U.S. population health. These changes have been documented across a variety of health outcomes ( Montez and Bisesti 2024 ; Sasson 2016 ; Zajacova and Lawrence 2018 ). Biological aging — an important biological risk factor for downstream age-related health outcomes — may underlie several of these outcomes. This study is among the first to evaluate whether the increased education inequalities in physical health are accompanied by widening differences in biological age. Overall, we find that educational differences in biological aging almost doubled from 1988–1994 to 2015–2018, providing further evidence of the growing health disadvantage among people with lower levels of education. However, unlike mortality studies ( Montez and Zajacova 2013 ; Sasson 2016 ), we find that the growing inequality was associated with a faster deceleration of aging among people who completed a college education, not the deterioration or stagnation of biological risk among people with lower levels of education. That is, every education group had a reduction in biological aging across this period, but the decline for the college educated was greater. Additionally, growing inequality in biological aging was not sensitive to other potentially important increasing population health risks (i.e. obesity) that have been previously found to be associated with biological aging. Altogether, this finding has broad implications for understanding how and why health inequalities across education groups persist in the United States, pointing to more research to understand how growing differences in biological risk may be contributing to demographic health trends. Increased inequality in biological aging portends further complications in reducing educational health disparities. Prior research has established a strong association between biological aging and multiple age-related health outcomes ( Crimmins et al. 2021b ; Levine 2013 ; Liu et al. 2019 ). The increased inequality in biological aging for people with lower levels of education may underlie their greater risk for downstream age-related health outcomes that, at the population level, would lead to health inequities that may not be easily addressed by focusing on specific outcomes or disease pathways, such as heart disease, cancer, or mortality, alone. Instead, increased inequality in biological aging may indicate that while some reductions could be made through treatment management for specific conditions, health inequalities may continue to be observed for other age-related health conditions due to general accelerated aging ( Levine 2013 ; Liu et al. 2019 ). Therefore, a further and stronger reduction in general biological aging among the least educated may be a potential avenue by which education inequalities in later life health more broadly could be reduced. Additionally, the slowing (or deceleration) of biological aging across all education groups in this period does not align with observed health patterns for low educated groups, pointing to potentially important incongruencies when evaluating biological risk and later life health in the population. Age-related health (i.e. mortality, disability, and cancer) among college educated adults has continued to improve in recent decades ( Kinsey et al. 2008 ; Lawrence et al. 2018 ; Singh et al. 2015 ; Withrow et al. 2021 ). A substantial deceleration in accelerated aging that has been observed in this study may point to lower biological risk as a potential contributor to these sustained improvements in population health. In contrast, people with lower levels of education have continued to see worsening or stagnation of morbidity, disability, and death ( Montez et al. 2021 ; Sasson and Hayward 2019 ; Zajacova and Lawrence 2018 ). However, we observed deceleration of biological aging for this group, albeit smaller than adults with more education, which is incongruent with observed population trends in physical health. This incongruency points to important questions that are beyond the scope of this paper but would, nevertheless, be invaluable to better understand how biological risk and changes in biological risk shape population health patterns among important population subgroups. First, how might biological risk (or biological aging) be more or less predictive of physical health across time? More succinctly, is biological risk for adults with lower levels of education less tied to age-related health in the later years than in the earlier years? If so, how are larger contextual and historical factors shaping changes between biological risk and specific health trends? For example, cause-specific mortality analysis may provide better insight into the types of deaths that may or may not be related to generalized biological aging. While prior research has found increased mortality among midlife adults with lower levels of education partly attributable to suicide and drug or alcohol misuse ( Case and Deaton 2022 ), which likely is not as closely tied to biological aging as age-related mortality from heart failure or cancer, the application to older adults may be more limited, as increases in these health behaviors among older adults show mixed results ( Han et al. 2017 ; Olfson et al. 2017 ). Thus, more research on older adult health trends among people with lower levels of education is needed to better understand how biological risk does or does not translate to population health trends, which will have implications for future trends. Lastly, this research evaluated whether increased inequality in biological aging over the time period was sensitive to the inclusion of other known risk factors for historical changes in biological aging in the U.S. population ( De Vera et al. 2014 ; Hampson et al. 2009 ; Levine and Crimmins 2018 ). Specifically, we evaluated whether changes in smoking, obesity, and use of cholesterol and hypertension medication attenuated or exacerbated these differences. Overall, education inequality in biological aging remained relatively unchanged with the inclusion of these factors. The limited influence of these risk factors could in part be attributed to three population patterns observed in this data. First, improvements may have been more limited but concentrated among the well-educated, such as smoking. Second, risk factors may have changed similarly across education groups (i.e. medication use). Third, people with higher levels of education may have faster increases in riskier health behaviors (i.e. obesity), which may offset improvements in biological aging. Future research should incorporate other known risk factors for biological aging and age-related health such as social engagement, access to wealth and income, lifetime healthcare coverage and use, or psychological stress, which may also differ by educational groups over time, to better understand other potential contributors to the widening inequality in biological aging. Additionally, to understand a health disparity, differences in level and magnitude of associations across groups are important to consider. It is for this reason that we analyzed the biological aging and associations with risk factors within each education group. We found no large differences in association between biological aging and health behavior or medication use risk factors (apart from taking cholesterol medication that was positively associated with accelerated biological aging for people with 16+ years of education). As such, the limited attenuation on the faster biological aging deceleration for adults with the highest education most likely does not stem from a difference in associations, but rather reflects relatively equal increases or decreases in risk factors across education groups. Moreover, it is also important to point out that, while educational differences in the deceleration of biological aging across time are largely unaffected by differential changes in health risks, changing risks do provide insight into biological aging within groups. Specifically, had the distribution of risk factors remained the same across period, each education group would have seen a faster deceleration in biological aging. For example, obesity, while not causal, appears to be an important countervailing trend in U.S. health that is not limited to one education group, but slowing biological aging improvements across them. In the near future, if obesity continues to rise as predicted ( De Pauw et al. 2022 ; Wang et al. 2020 ), improvements in biological aging may stagnate or reverse. Whether obesity (and the underlying causes of obesity) will contribute to educational inequality in health or changes in health will remain to be seen – but if new knowledge, technology, medication, interventions, or treatments that improve obesity-related biological risk, such as Ozempic for type 2 diabetes and Wegovy for weight management ( Michos et al. 2023 ), become widely used but unequal in access across education groups, greater differences in inequalities of biological aging may emerge. These future trends in health risks and biological aging are dynamic, and researchers need to continue to attend to the ways that education may shape them. While this study provides strong evidence of growing educational inequality in biological aging, limitations should be acknowledged. First, biomarker data were not available for everyone in the NHANES Study. Our biomarker sample consisted of 88.9% of participants available in the full study. We evaluated missing respondents by demographic characteristics and found that missing respondents were more likely to be a woman, Black, and younger, and have 0–11 years of schooling. Nevertheless, demographic patterns of missing data were similar across both periods, minimizing its impact on our analysis. Additionally, it is important to note with use of sampling weights and other survey design variables, respondents are nationally representative for their respective periods, allowing for comparison. Second, NHANES is a cross-sectional dataset. As such, we cannot account for mortality selection processes or compare individual changes or trajectories that might better provide insight into how educational inequalities in biological aging may be informed by cohort exposures or other population dynamics. Third, our biological age measure differs from those used in prior studies. While ancillary anlaysis showed a positive association between our measure and mortality after adjusting for age and gender, future studies should consider how the operationalization of biological age may influence population health research. Fourth, our biological age measure was comprised of only 8 biomarkers of aging due to limited biomarker collection across the entire period. More recent developments of biological aging have included up to 22 biomarkers of aging ( Crimmins et al. 2021a ). Nevertheless, we did adhere to the basic concept of biological aging that incorporates a multi-system measure of various aging and health related biomarkers and the gain from adding markers has been shown to be slight. Lastly, it is important to note that structural racism likely influences educational achievement and opportunites from education, which may impact biological aging inequalities. Future research should consider how structural racism (and changes in structural racism) may contribute to widening (or narrowing) education inequalities in health, whether it is from the over-representation of racially minoritized populations in lower education groups or diminished returns for those in higher ones. Despite these limitations, our study is strengthened by its use of a large nationally representative data set that includes detailed biomarker information over 30 years. In conclusion, while prior work has found improved biological aging among U.S. adults ( Levine and Crimmins 2018 ), our study examined educational inequalities in the deceleration of biological aging. We found strong evidence of widening educational inequality in biological aging over the past 25 years. These differences were not attenuated by other changes in important population health risks. Widening educational inequality in biological health may portend greater difficulty in addressing physical health inequalities if biological risk continues to play an important role in older adult health. Understanding how biological aging shapes health risks across education groups may also be useful to better understand future population health trends that may inform programs or policies that seek to advance health equity. Improving biological aging among the least advantaged has the potential to improve health and wellbeing in the overall U.S. population, more significantly than has already been observed. Supplementary Material Supplementary Tables