INTRODUCTION African American (AA) patients with breast cancer (BC) have the highest BC death rates and the shortest overall survival of any racial/ethnic group of women in the United States. 1 When diagnosed with BC, AA women are more likely to be diagnosed with estrogen receptor–negative (ER−) disease in comparison with White women and to have a worse prognosis on account of limited treatment options. AA women also present with more advanced stages of BC. 2 The cause of the disparities in BC mortality among AA women is multifactorial and reflects the interplay between biological factors (eg, differences in tumor biology, advanced stage, and health status) and socioeconomic disparities. The high prevalence of preexisting obesity-associated comorbidities can also affect a late stage of presentation, cancer progression, the choice of treatment, and overall survival. 3 – 6 Although epidemiological studies have established that preexisting hypertension and type 2 diabetes are significant prognostic factors for BC mortality among AA and non-Hispanic White (NHW) patients with BC, 3 , 7 there is limited evidence about the effects of coexisting cardiovascular disease (CVD) on BC outcomes among AA women. Furthermore, evaluating potential associations between coexisting CVD and the risk of CVD mortality, a competing outcome with BC death due to shared risk factors, 8 is critical in this understudied population because CVD mortality is the leading cause of death among older women with a history of BC. 9 AAs are a population of patients with BC that warrant greater attention, especially because observational and retrospective studies have demonstrated that cardiac toxicity is more prevalent in AA patients. 10 , 11 Cancer treatment can result in early or delayed cardiotoxicity, which can vary from asymptomatic left ventricular dysfunction to overt heart failure, hypertension, arrhythmias, myocardial ischemia, valvular disease, thromboembolic disease, pulmonary hypertension, and pericarditis. The most reported and monitored side effect of chemotherapy is left ventricular systolic dysfunction. 12 It has been proposed that the risk of postdiagnostic cardiac events could be intensified among women with coexisting CVD at diagnosis because of cardiotoxicity resulting from radiation therapy to the left breast, anthracycline-based chemotherapy, endocrine therapy, and HER2-targeted therapy. 13 – 18 Randomized trials testing trastuzumab in an adjuvant setting have reported a 5-fold increased risk of cardiac toxicity with the development of symptomatic heart failure in 1% to 2% of patients within the first 2 years after treatment initiation. 19 Well-known risk factors for cardiotoxicity from trastuzumab exposure include an age 50 years, race, underlying CVD, hypertension, a baseline left ventricular ejection fraction 55%, receipt of anthracycline therapy, diabetes, and obesity. 20 It could be hypothesized that AA women with BC would have a higher risk of CVD mortality in comparison with NHW women because of the cardiotoxicity effects from treatment. Troeschel et al 13 evaluated racial differences in the risk of CVD mortality among patients with BC; however, they examined risk among subgroups only by age. A later study conducted by the same researchers assessed the relationships between BC therapies and CVD mortality by race and concluded that non-Hispanic Black (NHB) patients had a higher risk of CVD death when they were treated with chemotherapy and endocrine therapies in comparison with NHW patients. 21 A retrospective study of HER2+ BC treated with neoadjuvant or adjuvant trastuzumab with or without pertuzumab after a median follow-up of 5.2 years found a 12% rate of cardiotoxicity among all study patients, but the incidence was nearly quintupled among Black women (24%) compared with White women (7%). 11 An examination of the associations between CVD, BC prognostic factors and treatment, and the risk of CVD mortality among AA women is important for planning interventions to reduce survival disparities among at-risk groups. Approximately 4500 women each year are diagnosed with invasive BC in the state of Maryland; one-third of these women are AA. 22 One distinctive feature of Maryland is that the NHB population represents more than 30% of the total population in contrast to the United States, in which the NHB population is close to 14%. 23 The racial dynamics in this state position Maryland as a significant resource to address BC survival disparities. Using data sources from the Maryland Cancer Registry (MCR), we examined the relationships between Black/White race, coexisting CVD, prognostic/treatment factors, and the risk of mortality outcomes (CVD-related, BC, and all-cause) in a diverse population of patients with BC. MATERIALS AND METHODS Study Population The MCR collects data for all cancer diagnoses among residents of the state, including patient demographics, clinical and diagnostic information, and treatment information. The MCR routinely links to additional data sources to capture missed cancers and obtain additional information on previously reported cases. Each year, the MCR identifies potentially unreported cancer cases by matching the MCR master database with Maryland death certificates indicating that a patient had cancer. Facilities and physicians are then followed up for information. The registry also links to Maryland Vital Statistics, the Social Security Death Index, and the National Death Index for information on vital statistics, including causes of death. For the current study, a total of 59,230 women diagnosed with BC in Maryland during 2007–2017 were identified from the MCR. The study was approved by the institutional review board at the Maryland Department of Health and was deemed exempt by the institutional review board at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. Analytical Population To be included in the study analysis, women aged ≥18 years had to be diagnosed with primary invasive BC as their first cancer between 2007 and 2017 (10,525 were excluded). The analysis was then restricted to NHB and NHW women for the study’s research question (3799 were excluded). Women who were diagnosed with in situ BC (n = 7532) or for whom the age at diagnosis (n = 2) or the follow-up time (n = 1295) were missing were excluded. The final analytical population included 36,088 women (25,181 NHWs and 10,907 NHBs). Exposures The primary exposure was race, which was categorized as NHB/AA or NHW (referent); these categories are referred to as Black and White. The following variables were also provided by the cancer registry and were evaluated: age at diagnosis; type of cancer treatment (surgery only, surgery plus radiation, surgery plus chemotherapy, surgery plus chemotherapy and radiation, no surgery, or treatment unknown); and tumor characteristics, including the ER/progesterone receptor (PR) status, HER2 status, Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results summary stage for BC (localized, regional, distant, or unknown), tumor grade (I, II, III-IV, or unknown), and laterality (left/bilateral vs right only; only among patients who received radiation). The MCR also collects data on preexisting medical conditions, factors influencing health status, and/or complications during a patient’s hospital stay for cancer treatment via International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification codes. Comorbidities are gathered from the demographics or diagnostic parts of a patient’s record. Among women who received treatment (n = 28,873), coexisting CVD at the BC diagnosis was captured with the following International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision codes: 394 to 398, 410 to 417, and 420 to 429. Ascertainment of Outcomes: BC-Specific and CVD-Specific Mortality Vital statistics information was ascertained by the MCR through linkage to Maryland Vital Statistics, the Social Security Death Index, and the National Death Index (specifically the date and cause of death until November 3, 2019). Primary causes of death were coded with International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision codes for BC deaths (C50) and total CVD-related deaths (I00-I99). Death due to any cause (all-cause mortality) was also evaluated. Statistical Analysis Demographic, clinical, and tumor characteristics of the study population were compared by race as counts and proportions. The survival time was calculated as the time since diagnosis to mortality or the date of last contact reported in the registry. A competing risks approach was used for CVD-related mortality and BC mortality. BC mortality was treated as the competing event for CVD mortality and vice versa. Cumulative incidence functions were estimated for CVD-related mortality and BC mortality to estimate the incidence of each outcome overall and at 5 years while accounting for the respective competing events, and they were compared with Gray’s test, the competing risk analog of the log-rank test. 24 – 26 Both the cause-specific hazard ratio (csHR) and the subdistribution hazard ratio (sdHR) were estimated. csHRs for CVD-related mortality were estimated with Cox proportional hazards regression; women who died of causes other than CVD were censored. An analogous approach was used to estimate csHRs for BC mortality. We also evaluated non-BC and non-CVD mortality as competing events ( Supporting Table 1 ). Fine and Gray regression models were used to estimate sdHRs for CVD-related mortality and BC mortality, which accounted for the influence of competing events. 27 Results for sdHRs and csHRs are presented in the tables and figures, whereas only sdHRs are reported in the text. For all-cause mortality, Kaplan-Meier failure curves were estimated to visualize the cumulative incidence, and Cox proportional hazards regression was performed to estimate hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Kaplan-Meier failure curves were compared with the log-rank test. The proportional hazards assumption was evaluated visually with graphs of cumulative hazards and interactions with the natural log of time. The time interactions indicated violations, so the overall hazard ratio was interpreted as the average hazard ratio over the follow-up time, and additional hazard ratios were reported for 0 to 5 years of follow-up and 5 years of follow-up. Age was considered a potential confounder and was adjusted for using natural cubic splines with knots at the 5th, 35th, 65th, and 95th percentiles. Coexisting CVD, tumor stage, hormone receptor (HR) status, tumor grade, and treatment were considered potential mediators, not confounders; however, these variables are also prognostic subgroups of interest, so analyses were additionally reported that were stratified by these variables. To evaluate the effects of hormone/endocrine therapy, we restricted data to women with ER+ BC. Subgroups were also evaluated by the age at diagnosis ( 50, 50–59, 60–69, and ≥70 years), with adjustments made for age continuously within each analysis. The HER2 receptor status was missing for 29% of the women, so stratified analyses by subtype were conducted in a subset. The likelihood ratio test was performed to test for interactions across subgroups. All analyses were conducted with Stata version 14.1 and SAS version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Inc, Cary, North Carolina). P values .05 were considered statistically significant. RESULTS Demographics, clinical and diagnostic factors, and tumor characteristics of the 36,088 women in our analytical population are described overall and by race in Table 1 . The mean age at BC diagnosis among all women was 60.7 years (standard deviation [SD] = 13.5 years). Black women (mean = 58.2 years, SD = 13.3 years) were younger at diagnosis than White women (mean = 61.8 years, SD = 13.5 years). Among women who received treatment for their BC, 7.9% had a coexisting diagnosis of CVD at BC diagnosis; more White women than Black women had CVD (8.6% vs 6.1%). Tumor characteristics and BC treatments also differed by race. Black women had a higher prevalence of ER–/PR– tumors in comparison with White women (26.4% vs 14.5%) and a higher prevalence of a distant stage in comparison with White women (5.3% vs 4%). A higher percentage of Black women received the combination of surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation (23.1%) in comparison with White women (15.8%). Among women with ER+ tumors, a smaller proportion of Black women received endocrine therapy (51.0%) in comparison with White women (60.5%). After a median follow-up of 5.8 years since the BC diagnosis, a total of 8019 deaths occurred; 3896 deaths (48.6%) were due to BC, and 1167 deaths (14.6%) were CVD-related. Supporting Figure 1 shows the cumulative incidence of all-cause mortality, CVD death, and BC death by race. Significant differences were observed in mortality outcomes by race for all-cause mortality, BC mortality, and CVD mortality. At 5 years, the unadjusted cumulative incidence of BC death was 12.9% (95% CI, 12.2%–3.6%) for Black women and 8.0% (95% CI, 7.7%–8.4%) for White women. During the same time, the incidence of CVD death was 2.2% (95% CI, 1.9%–2.5%) for Black women and 2.3% (95% CI, 2.1%–2.5%) for White women. Associations Between Race and CVD Mortality Figure 1 shows the age-adjusted sdHRs for Black women compared with White women for the hazard of CVD mortality overall and by subgroups; csHRs are presented in Supporting Table 2 . Overall, Black women had a higher hazard of CVD-related death (sdHR, 1.33; 95% CI, 1.17–1.51) in comparison with White women. Black women with ER+ tumors had an increased hazard of CVD mortality (sdHR, 1.41; 95% CI, 1.21–1 .63), whereas the association among Black women with ER– tumors was not statistically significant (sdHR, 1.20; 95% CI, 0.91–21.58). Among women with ER+ breast tumors, Black women who did not receive hormone therapy had a 53% increased hazard of CVD mortality, whereas the association among Black women who received hormone therapy differed and was null (sdHR, 1.08; 95% CI, 0.85–1.36). Among the subset with the HER2 status, Black women had a significantly higher hazard of CVD mortality than White women only for HR+ and HER2− tumors (sdHR, 1.27; 95% CI, 1.02–1.57) and HR+ and HER2+ tumors (sdHR, 2.03; 95% CI, 1.15–3.58; Supporting Table 3 ). Black women undergoing surgery and radiation had the highest hazard of CVD death (sdHR, 1.61; 95% CI, 1.22–2.13) in comparison with other treatment groups ( Fig. 1 ). Black women at a distant stage also had an almost 2-fold increased hazard of CVD mortality in comparison with White women (sdHR, 1.98; 95% CI, 1.01–3.88; Fig. 1 ). The association between race and CVD mortality differed by age. Black women aged 50 to 59 years at diagnosis had an almost 3-fold increased hazard of CVD mortality (sdHR, 2.86; 95% CI, 1.84–4.44), whereas the association for women aged 50, 60 to 69, or ≥70 years was weaker. Among women with treatment, race was not associated with CVD death among women with coexisting CVD at diagnosis (sdHR, 1.27; 95% CI, 0.91–1.77), whereas among women with no coexisting CVD at diagnosis, Black women had an increased hazard of CVD death in comparison with White women (sdHR, 1.43; 95% CI, 1.20–1.69; Fig. 1 ). However, in data stratified by the time since diagnosis, in the subgroup more than 5 years from diagnosis and with CVD, race was associated with a 66% increased hazard of CVD death ( Table 2 ). Among results stratified by laterality, hazard ratios were similar for both breast and CVD mortality outcomes for women treated with radiation ( Supporting Table 4 ). Associations Between Race and BC Mortality Figure 2 shows the age-adjusted sdHRs for Black women compared with White women for the hazard of BC mortality overall and by subgroups; csHRs are presented in Supporting Table 2 . Overall, Black women had a 66% higher hazard of BC death in comparison with White women (sdHR, 1.66; 95% CI, 1.55–1.77). The association between race and the hazard of BC mortality was similar by ER status. Endocrine therapy among ER+ cases did not significantly modify the association between race and the hazard of BC mortality. In the subset with the HER2 receptor status, there were significant racial disparities in BC mortality among HR+, HER2− BCs, triple-negative BCs, and HR−, HER2+ BCs, with point estimates ranging from 1.37 to 1.64 ( Supporting Table 3 ). Black women at localized (sdHR, 1.85; 95% CI, 1.55–2.20) and regional stages (sdHR, 1.71; 95% CI, 1.52–1.93) had an increased hazard of dying of BC in comparison with White women, whereas the association between Black women at a distant stage and BC mortality was not statistically significant ( Fig. 2 ). Black women undergoing surgery and radiation had the highest hazard of BC death (sdHR, 1.70; 95% CI, 1.29–2.25) in comparison with other treatment groups. Black women younger than 50 years at diagnosis had the highest hazard of BC death (sdHR, 1.95; CI 1.69–2.24) in comparison with other age groups, which were also shown to have significantly increased hazards of BC mortality. Having CVD at diagnosis was associated with an increased hazard of BC death among Black women (sdHR, 1.41; 95% CI, 1.06–1.87; Fig. 2 ). The results for all-cause mortality for Black women and with stratification by clinical characteristics of interest were similar in magnitude and direction to the BC mortality results ( Supporting Figure 2 ). Associations With Mortality Stratified by Time Since Diagnosis Racial disparities in mortality outcomes by time since diagnosis (0–5 vs 5 years) were also examined ( Table 2 ). In age-adjusted models, Black women had an increased hazard of BC mortality (sdHR, 1.76; 95% CI, 1.64–1.89) in comparison with White women in the first 5 years after their BC diagnosis; this differed significantly from the association observed more than 5 years after their BC diagnosis (sdHR, 1.32; 95% CI, 1.13–1.54). For CVD-related mortality, the results were comparable by time since diagnosis. DISCUSSION We examined racial disparities in mortality outcomes among women diagnosed with invasive BC in Maryland and focused on subgroups of CVD and clinical characteristics at diagnosis. Overall, Black women had a 66% higher hazard of BC mortality and a 33% higher hazard of CVD-related mortality in comparison with White women. The hazard of BC mortality for Black women was significantly higher within the first 5 years of their diagnosis in comparison with White women. In subgroup analyses, although Black women with CVD had an increased hazard of BC death, coexisting CVD was not associated with the hazard of CVD death. We observed higher hazards of both CVD and BC mortality among younger age groups of Black women diagnosed with BC in comparison with White women. Among treatment subgroups, the greatest Black-White racial disparity in CVD and BC death was among women who underwent surgery and radiation. Although the hazard of CVD mortality following invasive BC has been widely studied in recent years, 28 – 30 few studies have examined the hazard of CVD mortality among Black/AA women with invasive BC. 13 , 21 Results from our study showed an increased hazard of CVD mortality among Black women compared with White women with BC, with an almost 3-fold increased hazard among women aged 50 to 59 years in age-stratified results. We observed an almost null association with the hazard of CVD mortality among Black women 70 years old or older. Somewhat similarly to our results by age, Troeschel and colleagues 13 identified a monotonic reduction in CVD-related mortality disparities by race with increasing age at diagnosis. A systematic review conducted by Gernaat et al 28 that included mostly White study populations found that the risk of CVD mortality was higher among patients with BC with an older age at diagnosis; however, unadjusted hazard ratios for CVD death in Black-White comparisons found that risks decreased with increasing age at diagnosis. Our findings for CVD mortality among younger Black women have important clinical implications for creating a more targeted approach of cancer survivorship care for younger Black patients. Our study contributes novel associations that identify racial disparities in CVD mortality across preexisting CVD and BC treatments. To our knowledge, only one study by Collin and colleagues 21 evaluated the effects of BC treatments among NHB and NHW patients with BC and adjusted for comorbidities, including the CVD status. Unlike our study, information on CVD was based on a quantitative bias analysis because comorbidities at diagnosis were not collected by the Georgia Cancer Registry. They found hormone/endocrine therapy to be associated with a higher hazard of CVD mortality among NHB women (hazard ratio, 2.18; 95% CI, 0.78–6.12) but not among NHW women (hazard ratio, 0.66; 95% CI, 0.39–1.13). Results by race were similar but somewhat attenuated for chemotherapy. 21 Our results demonstrate that Black women with coexisting CVD had an increased hazard of BC mortality in comparison with White women, and the positive association between race and the hazard of CVD death among women with CVD was more pronounced after the first 5 years following the BC diagnosis with borderline statistical significance. Our results also indicate that radiation may have contributed to cardiotoxicity among Black patients versus White patients in our study population in comparison with other treatment combinations. Interestingly, we did not observe differences in the associations between race and CVD mortality by laterality among women who underwent radiation therapy. A major risk factor for cardiotoxicity among patients with BC is a high radiation dose, which our study was unable to assess. Preventive measures, including dose limitation and beam targeting, have been proposed to reduce the risk of cardiac toxicity. 31 – 34 More research is needed to examine the associations between radiation doses and the risk of cardiotoxicity among Black/AA patients with BC and the effects of these preventive measures in clinical practice. Another major risk factor for cardiotoxicity among patients with BC is HER2+ tumors because of treatment with the chemotherapeutic agent trastuzumab. 17 , 18 We observed a racial disparity among women with both HR+/HER2− and HR+/HER2+ tumors in CVD mortality. A recent study observed similar results by HR status but for all-cause mortality. 35 Although these subtypes can be treated effectively with targeted therapy, 36 racial disparities most likely exist because of therapy responses, such as differences in toxicity levels. 11 Although we were unable to examine treatment effects by specific chemotherapeutic agents, including trastuzumab, our findings support the growing body of literature researching racial survival disparities by HER2 status. Our results highlight the survival disparities that may be most apparent within the first 5 years after the diagnosis. In our study, Black women had a 76% higher hazard of BC mortality in comparison with White women; only modest increases in the hazard were observed for these outcomes after the first 5 years. This pattern was not observed for CVD mortality. A population-based study conducted by Menashe and colleagues 2 found similar results for BC mortality, with the greatest absolute difference in the hazard rates by Black-White race occurring during the first several years after the diagnosis. In another population-based study of racial disparities in BC mortality, Iqbal and colleagues 37 found that Black women were more likely to die of BC within 7 years of their diagnosis in comparison with NHW women. These survival disparities could be indicative of inequities associated with access to BC care because research has shown that Black/AA women experience the greatest delays in the initial diagnosis and BC treatment in comparison with other racial/ethnic groups. 38 – 40 This study had several strengths and limitations. We examined racial disparities for three mortality outcomes in a large cohort of patients with invasive BC, 30% of whom were Black. We evaluated subgroups by prognostic factors (ie, age, HR status, and stage) and treatment modalities. Yet, our study results may not be generalizable to patients with BC diagnosed outside Maryland. Although we explored racial disparities by CVD status, we were limited in our ability to fully capture the comorbidity data because of the ascertainment methods used by the MCR, and we restricted this analysis to women with known treatments. Although the prevalence of CVD could be underreported in our study sample, we found this prevalence among all women to be comparable to the prevalence of coexisting CVD in one of our recently published studies, which evaluated the effects of comorbidities at BC diagnosis on the risk of CVD mortality via data from the Missouri Cancer Registry and Missouri Patient Abstract System. 41 The percentage of women with ER+ tumors receiving hormone therapy might also be underreported because of data capture methods by the registry. We also lacked information on specific treatment agents for chemotherapies (ie, doxorubicin and other anthracycline chemotherapy agents that have dose-limiting cardiotoxicity), CVD treatments, radiation doses, and behavioral risk factor data for shared risk factors such as physical activity and obesity that affect both BC and CVD mortality. The evaluation of these factors could be important for further identification of at-risk groups. In conclusion, our study results suggest that there are racial disparities in breast and CVD mortality among Black and White women diagnosed with invasive BC and particularly among Black women diagnosed at younger ages. Time since diagnosis is also an important factor to consider in an evaluation of racial disparities in BC mortality. Clinicians, including those in the emerging field of cardio-oncology, should consider the impact of younger age, prognostic factors, and treatments on CVD mortality among Black patients. Early identification of those at risk for worse survival may improve surveillance and long-term outcomes. Supplementary Material Supplemental Materials Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article.