Introduction Cutaneous melanoma, which accounts for approximately 1% of all skin cancers, originates from transformed melanocytes, which are pigment-producing cells. 1 , 2 Melanoma is considered one of the most lethal forms of skin cancer worldwide and is responsible for most of skin cancer-related deaths. 3 In situ melanoma is curable through surgery at early stages; however, this type of skin cancer is often resistant to traditional chemo- and radiotherapies and has a relatively poor prognosis once the tumor metastasizes to other tissues and progresses to malignant melanoma (MM). 1 , 4 The incidence of melanoma continues to increase; however, mortality is declining because targeted compounds and immune checkpoint inhibitors, including humanized monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) that block cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen (CTLA)-4, programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) receptor and its ligand (PD-L1), have been used as standard therapies for MM in the clinical setting. 5 , 6 , 7 Nevertheless, only a minority of MM patients experience a clinical survival benefit from immunotherapies. 2 , 5 , 8 Moreover, these immunotherapeutic approaches are associated with high costs and can induce severe immune-related adverse events (irAEs) in some MM patients. 5 , 9 Therefore, the treatment of MM is still challenging in the clinical setting, and new therapeutic strategies for the treatment of MM are urgently needed. The formation of blood vessels is essential for tumor growth and metastasis. 10 , 11 MM is characterized by high vascularity, and neovascularization plays a significant role in regulating tumor progression and metastasis. 10 , 12 Furthermore, increased angiogenesis is correlated with poor prognosis, reduced overall survival, and an increased relapse rate. 13 , 14 Therefore, targeting neovascularization could serve as a beneficial therapeutic strategy for MM. 15 , 16 , 17 Previous reports have indicated that patients with MM have no clinical efficacy to therapy with angiogenesis inhibitor ABT-510. 18 In addition, a phase II trial of bevacizumab (Avastin), a vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitor, conducted with or without IFN-α-2b, achieved an overall response rate of 25% in patients with metastatic melanoma. 19 Therefore, the exploration and development of an effective angiostatic agents for the treatment of MM is urgently needed. Dipalmitoylphosphatidic acid (DPPA), a hydrolysis product of dipalmitoylphosphatidyl choline (DPPC), is catalyzed by phospholipase D (PLD). 20 However, the pathological function of DPPA has not been extensively studied. Previous reports have shown that DPPA promotes Bcl-2 expression in HeLa cells; however, the expression of Bcl-2 in A20 cells may not be regulated by DPPA. 21 , 22 These findings suggest that DPPA might inhibits tumor cell apoptosis in a cell type-dependent manner. Intriguingly, our previous studies demonstrated that DPPA directly inhibits tumor cell proliferation in triple-negative breast cancer and also suppresses angiogenesis and further inhibits tumor growth in luminal-like breast cancer. 23 , 24 However, the regulatory role of DPPA in other types of cancer remains unclear. Given the ant-angiogenic and ant-tumor effects of DPPA in breast cancer, we explored the function and underlying mechanisms involved in the regulation of tumor growth and metastasis in MM. CXC chemokines are a family of cytokines that are classified into ELR + and ELR − isoforms on the basis of the presence or absence of the ELR motif (Glu-Leu-Arg). 25 CXC chemokines play important roles in tumor angiogenesis, protumor inflammation, and protumor metastasis. 26 However, the two subtypes of CXC chemokines exhibit a bidirectional regulatory effect on angiogenesis. 27 The ELR + CXC chemokines have the potential to promote angiogenesis; nevertheless, members of the ELR − subtypes act as potent inhibitors of angiogenesis. 26 , 28 , 29 The members of interferon (IFN)-inducible ELR − CXC chemokines CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11 are selective ligands for CXC chemokine receptor 3 (CXCR3). Previous reports have indicated that the activation of the paracrine CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 axis result in antitumor and antiangiogenic activity in several tumor models, including melanoma. 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 Interestingly, the CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 autocrine axis in cancer cells promotes tumor growth and metastasis. 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 However, the role of this autocrine axis in vascular endothelial cells remains to be elucidated. Therefore, a better understanding of this autocrine axis in vascular endothelial cells is essential for the development of therapeutic strategies targeting the CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 axis to improve cancer treatment. In this study, we demonstrated that DPPA exhibits antitumor biological activity in MM. Importantly, the inhibition of tumor growth and metastasis by DPPA was attributed to the suppression of tumor neovascularization but not to a decrease in tumor cell proliferation and invasion. Furthermore, DPPA regulates angiogenesis by activating the IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 autocrine axis in vascular endothelial cells. Therefore, the findings of this study suggest that DPPA could serve as an anticancer agent for the treatment of MM and provide a potential antiangiogenic therapeutic strategy for MM through the activation of the IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 autocrine axis in vascular endothelial cells. Results DPPA inhibits tumor growth in malignant melanoma Our previous reports indicated that DPPA inhibits tumor growth in breast cancer. 23 , 24 However, whether DPPA has the same effect on melanoma is remains unclear. Therefore, B16-F10 cell and A375 cell xenograft tumor models were constructed and randomly divided into two groups for each type of tumor model. Afterward, the mice were treated with DMSO or DPPA every two days beginning on the 7th day after the tumor cells were injected, and the tumor volume was determined during drug treatment. The results revealed that the tumors treated with DPPA were smaller than those treated with DMSO in both the B16-F10 allograft ( Figure 1 A) and A375 xenograft ( Figure 2 A) tumor models. Following treatment, the tumors were peeled off and weighted. Compared with that in the DMSO group, tumor weight in the B16-F10 allograft ( Figure 1 B) and A375 xenograft ( Figure 2 B) groups were also significantly suppressed by DPPA. Interestingly, proliferating cells in tumor tissues were detected via Ki67 staining, and the results revealed no significant differences in the number of Ki67-positive cells between the DMSO and DPPA groups in either the B16-F10 allograft ( Figure 1 C) or A375 xenograft ( Figure 2 C) tumor models. In addition, we demonstrated that melanoma development was correlated with the tumor MVD ( Figures S1 A and S1B). Therefore, vascular endothelial cell markers, including CD34 and CD31, were used to assess angiogenesis in the tumor tissues of both types of tumor models via IHC staining. The staining results revealed that compared with the DPPA groups, a greater number of CD34 and CD31-positive blood vessels were found in the tumor tissues of the DMSO groups of B16-F10 allograft ( Figure 1 D) and A375 xenograft ( Figure 2 D) mouse tumor models. In addition, H E staining was used to evaluate the potential toxicity of DPPA to major organs (heart, liver, lung, kidney, and intestine). DPPA treatment did not evoke treatment-associated normal tissue toxicity in the of A375 xenograft mouse tumor model ( Figure S1 C). These findings suggest that the ability of DPPA to inhibit melanoma growth might be dependent on tumor neovascularization rather than tumor cell proliferation. Figure 1 DPPA suppresses tumor growth in a B16-F10 allograft mouse tumor model Quantification of tumor volume every two days after DMSO or DPPA treatment (A), and tumors were weighted after drug treatment at the 15 days postinoculation (B) in B16-F10 allograft mouse tumors. C57BL/6J mice (female, 6 weeks old). n = 7 for each group. Representative images of Ki67 IHC staining and quantification of the proliferation index (C), as well as CD34 and CD31 IHC staining and MVD quantification (D) for tumor sections. n = 6 tumor tissues, and 4 independent fields for each tumor. Scale bars: 50 μm. Data are presented as mean ± SD. Statistical significance: p values were calculated using two-way ANOVA for A, and Student’s t test (two-tailed unpaired t test) for B, C, and D. ∗ p 0.05, ∗∗∗ p 0.001, and ns: p 0.05 (compared with the DMSO group). Figure 2 DPPA inhibits tumor growth in an A375 xenograft mouse tumor model Tumor volumes were measured every two days after DMSO or DPPA treatment beginning at 7 days postinoculation for two weeks (A), and tumors were weighted after drug treatment at 21 days postinoculation (B) in A375 xenograft mouse tumors. BALB/c nude mice (male, 6 weeks old). n = 6 for each group. (C) Representative images of Ki67 IHC staining and quantification of the proliferation index. n = 6 tumor tissues, and 4 independent fields for each tumor. Scale bars: 50 μm. (D) Tumor angiogenesis was measured using CD34 and CD31 IHC staining, and MVD was quantification for tumor sections. n = 6 tumor tissues, and 4 independent fields for each tumor. Scale bars: 50 μm. Data are presented as mean ± SD. Statistical significance: p values were calculated using two-way ANOVA for A, and Student’s t test (two-tailed unpaired t test) for B, C, and D. ∗ p 0.05, ∗∗ p 0.01, ∗∗∗ p 0.001, and ns: p 0.05 (compared with the DMSO group). DPPA attenuates tumor metastasis of malignant melanoma Hematogenous metastasis is becoming as the primary reason for poor prognosis in MM patients. 42 , 43 Owing to the inhibitory effect of DPPA on the MVD of tumor tissues, we further focused on the effect of DPPA on MM tumor metastasis using B16-F10 cell and A375 cell caudal vein lung metastasis models. Each type of mouse lung metastasis model was randomly divided into two groups and treated with DMSO or DPPA. After treatment, the lung tissues were peeled off, and the number of metastatic nodules on the surface of the lung tissues was counted. The results showed that DPPA significantly inhibited the formation of metastatic nodules on the surface of lung tissue compared with DMSO group in the B16-F10 ( Figure 3 A) and A375 ( Figure 4 A) mouse lung metastasis models. Afterward, the lung tissues were sectioned and stained with hematoxylin-eosin. The results showed that the number of metastatic foci in the sections of the DPPA groups was also markedly less than that in the DMSO groups of B16-F10 ( Figure 3 B) and A375 ( Figure 4 B) mouse metastasis models. All the results suggest that DPPA can decrease tumor metastasis in MM. However, whether the antimetastatic effect of DPPA on MM is mediated through the inhibition of tumor cell invasion or a reduction in tumor neovascularization needs to be further elucidated. Figure 3 DPPA inhibits tumor metastasis in a B16-F10 murine pulmonary metastatic model Analysis of tumor metastatic foci inside and on the surface and internal of the lung tissues in a the B16-F10 murine pulmonary metastasis model. (A) Representative macroscopic images of lungs and quantification of the foci on the surface of lung tissues in both the DMSO and DPPA groups. C57BL/6J mice (female, 6 weeks old). n = 6 for each group. (B) Representative images of H E staining of lung tissues and quantification of the micrometastatic foci within the lung tissues of the DMSO and DPPA groups. C57BL/6J mice (female, 6 weeks old). n = 6 for each group. Scale bars: 500 μm. Data are presented as mean ± SD. Significant effect: p values were calculated using Student’s t test (two-tailed unpaired t test). ∗ p 0.05 and ∗∗ p 0.01 (compared with the DMSO group). Figure 4 DPPA inhibits tumor metastasis in an A375 murine pulmonary metastatic model (A) Representative macroscopic images of lungs and the quantification of foci on the surface of lung tissues in a DMSO- and DPPA-treated A375 murine pulmonary metastasis model. BALB/c nude mice (male, 6 weeks old). n = 6 for each group. (B) Representative images of H E staining of lung tissues and quantification of the micrometastatic foci within the lung tissues of DMSO- and DPPA-treated groups. BALB/c nude mice (male, 6 weeks old). n = 6 for each group. Scale bars: 500 μm. Data are presented as mean ± SD. Significant effect: p values were calculated using Student’s t test (two-tailed unpaired t test). ∗ p 0.05 and ∗∗ p 0.01. DPPA does not affect the viability and invasion of malignant melanoma cells To further elucidate the mechanism by which DPPA inhibits tumor growth and metastasis, the viability and invasion of B16-F10 and A375 cells treated with DMSO or DPPA were detected in vitro . The cells were treated with DMSO or DPPA for 24 h and 48 h, after which CCK8 solution was added to each well. The results of the CCK8 assay revealed that DPPA did not affect the proliferation of B16-F10 and A375 cells ( Figures 5 A and 5B). These findings were consistent with the Ki67 staining results in the tumor tissues of the MM xenograft tumor models indicated previously. Furthermore, a transwell assay was used to explore the effect of DPPA on the invasion of MM cells. However, no significant difference was observed in the number of cells that invaded to the lower surface of the filter between the DMSO- and DPPA-treated groups for both B16-F10 and A375 cells ( Figures 5 C and 5D). These results further suggest that the ability of DPPA to inhibit tumor growth and metastasis may be dependent on tumor angiogenesis rather than the proliferation and invasion of MM cells. Figure 5 DPPA does not impact the viability and metastatic potential of malignant melanoma cells Cell viability of B16-F10 (A) and A375 (B) cells treated with the indicated concentrations of DMSO or DPPA for 24 h and 48 h n = 3 technical replicates from 5 biological replicates for each group. Representative microscopy images and statistical analysis of the invasion of B16-F10 (C) and A375 (D) cells. n = 3 technical replicates from 3 biological replicates for each group. Scale bars: 100 μm. Data are presented as mean ± SD. Significant effect: p values were calculated using Student’s t test (two-tailed unpaired t test). ns represents no significant difference compared with the DMSO group ( p 0.05). DPPA directly inhibits neovasculation in vitro and in vivo DPPA attenuated neovasculogenesis in the tumor tissues of MM xenograft tumor models; therefore, we further investigated the direct effect of DPPA on angiogenesis. Angiogenesis is a process involving the proliferation, migration and tube formation of vascular endothelial cells. First, human dermal microvascular endothelial cells (HDMECs) were treated with DMSO and DPPA for 48 h, and CCK8 solution was added to each well to assess the direct inhibitory effect of DPPA on cell viability. DPPA inhibited the proliferation of HDMECs in a dose-dependent manner ( Figure 6 A). Therefore, the 10 μM DPPA was used to evaluate the antiangiogenic effect of DPPA in all the in vitro experiments to prevent the inhibition of angiogenesis by DPPA due to cell growth inhibition. Subsequently, the effects of DPPA on the migration and tube formation capabilities of vascular endothelial cells from the aorta were investigated. Approximately 1 mm long aortas isolated from SD rats were seeded on Matrigel and treated with DMSO or DPPA for 10 days at a concentration of 10 μM, after which the cell viability inhibition rate remained below 20%. As shown in Figure 6 B, a large amount of capillary-like network formed in the DMSO group, whereas little of this network was observed in the DPPA group. Moreover, the statistical analysis results also revealed that DPPA markedly reduced the growth of microvessels from the aorta compared with the DMSO group ( Figure 6 C). Figure 6 DPPA directly attenuates neovascularization (A) Cell viability of HDMECs treated with DMSO or DPPA for 48 h n = 3 technical replicates from 5 biological replicates for each group. DPPA at a concentration of 10 μM, which resulted in an approximately 10% decrease in cell viability, was selected for subsequent angiogenesis assays. (B) Representative images of the angiogenic network of endothelial cells sprouting from rat aortic ring vascular wall after 7 days of treatment with DMSO or DPPA. Sprague-Dawley rats (male, 7 weeks old). n = 5 for each group. Scale bars: 500 μm. (C) Quantification analysis of the area of the angiogenic network sprouting from the rat aortic ring from image B. (D) Representative macroscopic images of mouse subcutaneous Matrigel plugs treated with DMSO or DPPA. BALB/c mice (female, 6 weeks old). n = 6 for each group. (E) Representative images of CD31 IF staining of Matrigel plug sections from D. (F) Quantification analysis of the CD31-positive blood vessel area within the Matrigel plug sections from image E. n = 6 Matrigel plugs, and 4 independent fields for each plug. Scale bars: 50 μm. Data are presented as mean ± SD. Statistical significance: p values were calculated using Student’s t test (two-tailed unpaired t test). ∗∗ p 0.01 and ∗∗∗ p 0.001 (compared with the DMSO group). Furthermore, a Matrigel plug assay was performed to investigate whether DPPA was able to induce an antiangiogenic response in vivo . Matrigel supplemented with heparin, FGF-2, and either DMSO or DPPA was subcutaneously maintained in BALB/c mice for 7 days, after which the gel plugs were removed and photographed. As shown in Figure 6 D, the Matrigel plugs from the blank control group, which contained heparin only, appeared white, and the gel plugs with FGF-2 and DMSO exhibited a deep red color; notably, those with FGF-2 and DPPA displayed a light red color. Accordingly, further immunofluorescence staining of CD31, a marker of vascular endothelial cells, in sections of the gel plugs revealed fewer CD31-positive cells (red) in the DPPA group than in the DMSO group ( Figure 6 E). In addition, statistical analysis revealed that DPPA treatment significantly decreased the MVD of the gel plugs compared with the DMSO-treated group ( Figure 6 F). These findings suggest that DPPA inhibits the ability of vascular endothelial cells to sprout from preexisting blood vessels in the tissue microenvironment and migrate through the Matrigel to form new vasculature. DPPA inhibits angiogenesis by activating the autocrine IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 axis in vascular endothelial cells A human angiogenesis PCR array was used to identify the potential mechanisms involved in the antiangiogenic progression induced by DPPA, and 17 altered genes were identified (fold change log2 ≤ −2 or ≥2) in DPPA-treated HDMECs ( Figure 7 A). Among these genes, 11 were upregulated and 6 were downregulated in DPPA-treated HDMECs compared with those in DMSO-treated HDMECs. Additionally, these identified angiogenesis-related differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were further classified by Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) categorization. KEGG analysis revealed that “cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction” was the process associated with the greatest number of significantly changed DEGs in DPPA-treated HDMECs ( Figure 7 B). In this pathway, we observed the upregulation of the IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11 signaling, which has been reported to activate this paracrine signaling by immune cells to inhibit angiogenesis, in DPPA-treated HDMECs. In addition, previously report indicated that IFN-γ induced the expression of CXCL9/10/11 through nuclear factor kappa-beta (NF-κB) pathway. 41 Therefore, real-time RT-PCR and western blotting were performed to validate the observed trends in the array of DEGs related to IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11 signaling. For this purpose, RNAs and proteins were extracted from DMSO- and DPPA-treated HDMECs at 48 h, and significant increases in the mRNA and protein levels of IFN-γ, CXCL9, CXCL10, CXCL11, and phosphorylate p65 (pp65) were detected in DPPA-treated HDMECs compared with those in DMSO-treated group ( Figures 7 C and 7D) and tumor tissues ( Figure S2 A), but not differences be detected in melanoma cells ( Figure S2 B). In addition, molecular docking was further performed to determine the binding affinity of DPPA for IFN-γ, CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11. As shown in Figure 7 E, the DPPA binds with IFN-γ, CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11 with binding free energies of −5.18, −4.12, −4.14, and −4.69 kcal/mol, respectively. In addition, DPPA exhibited the strongest binding affinity with IFN-γ and formed hydrogen bonds with Leu51 (2.8 Å), Phe52 (3.3 Å), Tyr76 (2.9 Å), and Leu53 (3.1 Å) ( Figure 7 F). Overall, the combined analysis of binding affinity data and structural interactions has revealed that DPPA preferentially binds to IFN-γ, which may further activate NF-κB and induced CXCL9/10/11. Accordingly, IFN-γ also markedly increases the mRNA and protein expression of CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11 ( Figures 7 G and 7H). In addition, inhibition of NF-κB significantly decreases the mRNA expression of IFN-γ ( Figure 7 I). All the validated results were consistent with the array data, and implied that the activation of the autocrine IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11 signaling in vascular endothelial cells may play an important role in DPPA-induced antiangiogenic activity. Figure 7 DPPA suppresses angiogenesis through the activation of the IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 axis in vascular endothelial cells (A) Angiogenesis PCR array for human dermal microvascular endothelial cells (HDMECs) treated with DMSO and DPPA at a concentration of 10 μM for 48 h. The relative expression levels were calculated as the log2 fold change, and the differentially expressed genes were selected on the basis of a log2 ≤ −2 or ≥2. (B) KEGG classification of differentially expressed genes in A. HDMECs were treated with DMSO and DPPA (10 μM) for 48 h, and RNAs and proteins were collected to analyze the expression of the IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11 axis at both the transcriptional and protein levels using RT-qPCR (C) and western blotting (D) assays. n = 3 technical replicates from 3 biological replicates for each group. (E) 3D models of docking poses for DPPA and receptors (including IFN-γ, CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11) predicted by Autodock Vina Tools. (F) 2D model of the interaction between DPPA and IFN-γ. HDMECs were treated with IFN-γ for 48 h, after which the RNAs and proteins were collected and subjected to RT-qPCR (G) and western blotting (H) to quantify the expression levels of CXCL9, CXCL10, CXCL11, p65, and pp65. β-actin was served as an internal control. (G) n = 3 technical replicates from 3 biological replicates for each group. (H) n = 3 biological replicates for each group. (I) HDMECs were treated with NF-κB inhibitor (NF-κB-IN-11) for 48 h, and RNAs were collected to analyze the expression of the IFN-γ at the transcriptional levels using qRT-PCR. β-actin was served as an internal control. n = 3 biological replicates for each group. Cell migration (J) and tube formation on Matrigel (K) of HDMECs treated with DMSO, DPPA, or DPPA with CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 axis-blocking neutralizing antibodies. n = 3 technical replicates from 3 biological replicates for each group. Scale bars: 100 μm. Data are presented as mean ± SD. Significant effects: p values were calculated using Student’s t test (two-tailed unpaired t test) for C, D, G, H, and I, and one-way ANOVA for J and K. ∗ p 0.05, ∗∗ p 0.01, ∗∗∗ p 0.001 and ns: p 0.05 (compared with the control/DMSO group). Owing to the paracrine of IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11 by immune cells, which can bind to the receptor of CXCR3 to inhibit angiogenesis, transwell migration and tube formation assays were performed to elucidate the antiangiogenic function of the autocrine IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 axis in vascular endothelial cells. The results demonstrated that the IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 axis was involved in the migration and formation of capillary-like microvascular networks in HDMECs ( Figures S2 B and S2C). Furthermore, we investigated whether the IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 axis is involved in the antiangiogenic effect of DPPA. As shown in Figures 7 J and 7K, the number of migrated cells and the formation of capillary-like microtubule networks were reduced in the DPPA-treated HDMECs compared with those in the DMSO-treated HDMECs. However, no significant differences were observed in the number of migrated cells and the formation of capillary-like microtubule networks between the DMSO- and DPPA-treated HDMECs, in which CXCL9, CXCL10, CXCL11, or CXCR3 was inhibited. Accordingly, the results of the statistical analysis also revealed that decreased expression of the CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 axis could abrogate the inhibitory effect of DPPA on angiogenesis. In conclusion, these findings suggest that the activation of the autocrine IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 axis in vascular endothelial cells inhibits angiogenesis, and is also involved in the antiangiogenic function of DPPA. Discussion MM is a highly metastatic form of skin cancer. 44 , 45 One of the pathways involved in MM metastasis is via the bloodstream. 15 MM tumor cells migrate away from the primary tumor, invade nearby blood vessels, and then are transported through the bloodstream to seed into distant organs. 46 , 47 In this study, we confirmed that DPPA does not affect the viability or invasion of tumor cells but directly inhibits angiogenesis, which is a pathway that enables MM metastasis. Consequently, we conclude that DPPA blocks tumor metastasis to distant organs by preventing tumor cells from circulating in the bloodstream. In addition, the inhibition of tumor neovascularization by DPPA alone is sufficient to significantly suppress tumor growth and metastasis in MM in vivo . In the clinical setting, surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy are the primary conventional cancer treatment approaches. However, patients with malignant tumors often occurrence poor prognosis. 48 With the development of molecular biology, targeted therapy, antiangiogenic therapy, and immunotherapy have shown excellent therapeutic effects and potential in the treatment of advanced malignant tumors. 49 Angiogenesis is correlated with tumor development and metastasis and high mortality rate and relapse rate in MM patients. 12 Consequently, antiangiogenic therapy, in which use of VEGF and its receptor (VEGFR)-targeted drugs are used to inhibit tumor angiogenesis, could serve as a beneficial therapeutic strategy for MM by “starving” cancer cells. 50 With the widespread use of anti-VEGF drugs in the clinic, several adverse reactions (such as cardiotoxicity, proteinuria, and gastrointestinal perforation) and feedback activation of non-VEGF vascular growth factors have emerged resulting in resistance to VEGF-targeted therapy. 51 , 52 , 53 Therefore, exploring new targets in the angiogenic pathway and developing targeted drugs could also be promising strategies to overcome the side effects of antiangiogenic therapy for malignant tumors. In this study, we detected the antiangiogenic effects of DPPA and bevacizumab in vitro ( Figure S3 ). Although bevacizumab exhibited better antiangiogenic effect than DPPA in vitro . Due to concerns about the adverse effects of VEGF-targeted therapies, DPPA could be a safer clinical alternative for the treatment, based on the advantage of activation of autocrine IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 axis, rather than VEGF signaling in vascular endothelial cells. The mechanism of DPPA in vascular endothelia cells may avoid VEGF-targeted therapy-associated drug resistance and toxicity. Phosphatidic acid (PA) is a lipid second messenger that is associated with the survival and proliferation of cells. 21 DPPA is an acidic phospholipid, and its regulatory function in pathological progression remains unclear. Reports have indicated that DPPA induces Bcl-2 expression in HeLa cervical carcinoma cells but not in A20 B lymphoma cells. 21 , 22 These reports suggest that DPPA may play an antiapoptotic role in the development of solid tumors. Accordingly, our previous reports demonstrated that DPPA inhibits tumor cell proliferation in triple-negative breast cancer but not in luminal-like breast cancer. 23 , 24 However, DPPA inhibits tumor growth in luminal-like breast cancer through the suppression of tumor angiogenesis. 23 These findings confirmed that DPPA may regulate solid tumor progression in a cell type-dependent manner through different regulatory mechanisms. In this study, we further confirmed that DPPA can attenuate tumor growth and metastasis in MM. However, DPPA did not affect the expression of Bcl-2 in either melanoma cells or vascular endothelial cells ( Figure S3 C). Moreover, tumor cell proliferation and invasion remained unregulated by DPPA in melanoma. Importantly, we clarified that the inhibitory mechanism of DPPA on the progression of MM differs from that previously reported for cervical carcinoma, B lymphoma, and breast cancer. The molecular docking results suggest a potential mechanism of DPPA inhibits tumor growth and metastasis in MM dependent on decreasing neovascularization in tumor tissues may through interaction with and promoting the expression of IFN-γ-NF-κB positive feedback loop and induced CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 signaling. The direct binding between DPPA and IFN-γ will be further investigated in the future research. Our previously report demonstrated that DPPA inhibits CUX1/FGF/HGF signaling in vascular endothelial cells. 23 Previously report indicated that transcription factor Cut-like homeobox 1 (CUX1) directly represses NF-κB signaling in tumor-associated macrophages. 54 Both of these researches suggest the potential mechanisms of antiangiogenic function of DPPA are multi pathways, which through regulating CUX1/FGF/HGF signaling and IFN-γ-NF-κB positive feedback loop crosstalk. Both our previous reports and this study further demonstrated the tumor type-specific regulatory methods of DPPA. The difference in antitumor function of DPPA between breast cancer and melanoma is still unknown. We speculate that the difference in antitumor effects of DPPA may depend on the tumor background, such as sex hormones. The mechanisms underlying this difference in antitumor effects will be investigated in future study on the potential applications of DPPA in different tumors. CXC chemokines can be classified into two subgroups on the basis of the presence or absence of a potential ELR motif “Glu-Leu-Arg”, and are involved in various cancer developmental processes, including angiogenesis, metastasis, cancer cell proliferation, and invasion. 55 CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11 belong to a class of IFN-γ-induced ELR motif-negative CXC chemokines that are predominantly secreted by monocytes, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and cancer cells. 41 These chemokines function by binding to the G-protein coupled receptor CXCR3 to exert bidirectional regulatory effects on tumor development. 41 The autocrine IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 axis in tumor cells facilitates proliferation and migration of tumor cells. 41 , 56 , 57 Previous report has demonstrated that treatment with IFN induces the production of CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11 in metastatic melanoma cells. 58 In addition, autocrine CXCL10/CXCR3 signaling promotes tumor cell growth, motility and metastasis in melanoma. 59 Conversely, activation of the paracrine signaling axis often induces the migration, differentiation, and activation of immune cells to enhance antitumor immune responses. 57 , 60 , 61 Accordingly, report has indicated that the expression of CXCR3 by activated CD8 + T cells is associated with increased survival in melanoma patients with stage III disease. 62 The findings in melanoma also suggest that the paracrine IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 axis may increase the survival of patients. 62 Therefore, the IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 axis plays a bidirectional regulatory role in melanoma on the basis of the paracrine from immune cells in the tumor microenvironment or autocrine from tumor cells in melanoma. In this study, we further demonstrated that autocrine the IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 axis in vascular endothelial cells could suppresses tumor growth and metastasis in MM. However, the antitumor functional mechanism of the autocrine IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 axis in vascular endothelial cells needs to be further clarified. On the basis of the presence of the ELR motif, CXC chemokines are divided into angiogenic ELR + CXC chemokines and the angiostatic ELR − CXC chemokines. 26 , 63 Multiple studies have demonstrated that the IFN-inducible chemokines CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11, which are ELR − CXC chemokines, potently inhibit angiogenesis. 64 , 65 The angiostatic biological function of CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11 is mediated by various mechanisms through binding to CXCR3, a receptor expressed in various cell types, including immune and endothelial cells. 66 , 67 , 68 On the one hand, the CXCR3/CXCR3 ligand biological axis suppresses tumor angiogenesis by mediating immunoangiostasis in a heterotopic murine model of renal cell carcinoma (RENCA) and preclinical models of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). 32 , 69 These reports illustrated that the expression of CXCR3 ligands (i.e., CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11) in the tumor microenvironment promotes the recruitment of CXCR3+ mononuclear cells to tumor tissues, further enhances Th1/type 1 cytokine cell-mediated immunity, and suppresses tumor-associated angiogenesis. 28 , 32 In addition, a previous report suggested that increasing the expression of IFN-γ by mononuclear cells may provide a pivotal method for the production of angiostatic CXC chemokines and the downregulation of the expression of IL-8, an angiogenic ELR + CXC chemokine, and ENA-78 to inhibit tumorigenesis. 29 On the other hand, IFN-γ-inducible chemokines, such as CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11, directly inhibit angiogenesis through a nonimmune-dependent mechanism. Reports have demonstrated that the expression of CXCL9 and CXCL10 in tumor cells decreases tumorigenesis and metastasis in NSCLC by directly targeting tumor-derived angiogenesis in an immune cell-independent manner rather than by inhibiting the proliferation of tumor cells. 35 , 70 However, the exact mechanism by which CXCL9 and CXCL10 inhibit angiogenesis has not been fully elucidated. Previous reports have demonstrated that CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11 attenuate endothelial cell proliferation and impede angiogenesis in a CXCR3-dependent manner through binding to CXCR3 on the surface of endothelial cells. 66 , 71 These reports suggest that the secretion of CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11 by tumor cells can bind to CXCR3, which is expressed on the surface of endothelial cells, to directly inhibit angiogenesis. In this study, we further elucidated that activating IFN-γ-inducible CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11 in vascular endothelial cells is sufficient to suppress angiogenesis in an immune cell-independent and CXCR3-dependent manner. In addition, the activation of the autocrine IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 axis by vascular endothelial cells is sufficient to regulate MM growth and metastasis by directly targeting angiogenesis. In this study, we further investigated the anticancer role of DPPA in MM. Our findings demonstrated that DPPA suppresses tumor growth and metastasis in MM; however, DPPA does not inhibit the proliferation and invasion of melanoma cells. These results suggest that the anticancer function of DPPA may be mediated through other regulatory mechanisms. We further demonstrated that neovascularization gradually increases with the development of MM and that DPPA inhibits neovascular growth within MM tumor tissues. In addition, the activation of the IFN-γ-CXCL9/10/11-CXCR3 axis in vascular endothelial cells by DPPA is sufficient to inhibit the formation of new microvessels, which can further regulate tumor growth and metastasis. Taken together, the results of this study further demonstrated that DPPA is an effective antineovascularization agent for the treatment of MM. Limitations of the study The limitations of this study are as follows: first, our analyses focused on the binding of DPPA with IFN-γ is mainly based on molecular docking, and it remains uncertain whether DPPA direct binding to IFN-γ. Second, DPPA can directly inhibit tumor cell proliferation in breast cancer but not in melanoma. The difference in antitumor function of DPPA between breast cancer and melanoma is still unknown. Resource availability Lead contact Requests for further information and resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Qian-Qian Zhang ( zhangqianqian@gdpu.edu.cn ). Materials availability This study did not generate new unique reagents. Data and code availability • All data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contact upon request. • This paper does not report original code. • Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request. Acknowledgments This work was supported by the Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangzhou (grant no 202201010005 ); College Characteristic Innovation Program of Guangdong province (grant no 2024KTSCX174 ); College Students’ Innovative Entrepreneurial Training Plan Program (grant no 202510573002 ); College Students’ Innovative Training Plan Program (grant no S202410573033 ); the Project of Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine of Guangdong Province of China (grant no 20202106 ); 10.13039/501100012245 Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangdong Province of China (grant no 2023A0505050153 ); and the Key Engineering Team, Discipline Cultivation Projects, 10.13039/501100008366 Guangdong Pharmaceutical University (grant no 2024ZZ10 ). Author contributions Conceptualization, Q.-Q.Z., J.D., and J.L.; methodology, C.Q. and L.Z.; investigation, Z.W., Z.F., C.H., J.Y., Z.Y., H.R., Y.D., Y.L., L.H., and M.Z.; writing – original draft, Z.W., Z.F., and Q.-Q.Z.; writing – review and editing, Z.W., Z.F., and Q.-Q.Z.; funding acquisition, Q.-Q.Z., L.W., Y.D., X.L., and Q.-Q.Z.; resources, Q.-Q.Z., J.D., and L.W.; supervision, Q.-Q.Z., J.D., J.L., and L.W. Declaration of interests The authors declare no competing interests. Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process No generative AI or AI-assisted tools were used for data analysis or content generation in this work. STAR★Methods Key resources table REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Antibodies anti-CD31 Abcam Cat# ab28364; RRID: AB_726362 anti-Ki67 Abcam Cat# ab16667; RRID: AB_302459 anti-CXCL10 Boster Cat# BA4723; RRID: AB_3750470 anti-CD34 Boster Cat# BA0532; RRID: AB_3750472 anti-p65 Boster Cat# BA0610; RRID: AB_2722762 anti-CXCL9 Affinity Biosciences Cat# DF9920; RRID: AB_2843114 anti-CXCL11 Affinity Biosciences Cat# DF9917; RRID: AB_2843111 anti-β-actin Affinity Biosciences Cat# AF70178; RRID: AB_2839420 anti-phospho-p65 cell signaling Technology Cat# 3033L; RRID: AB_331285 anti-CXCL9 R D Systems Cat# MAB392; RRID: AB_2261214 anti-CXCL10 R D Systems Cat# MAB266; RRID: AB_2261309 anti-CXCL11 R D Systems Cat# MAB672; RRID: AB_2088019 anti-CXCR3 R D Systems Cat# MAB160; RRID: AB_2086754 anti-BCL2 Beyotime Cat# AG1225; RRID: AB_3750475 anti-BCL2 UpingBio Cat# YP-Ab-00322; RRID: AB_3750474 anti-VEGF UpingBio Cat# YP-mAb-15978; RRID: AB_3750551 Biological samples Mouse heart This paper N/A Mouse liver This paper N/A Mouse lungs This paper N/A Mouse intestine This paper N/A Mouse kidneys This paper N/A Mouse tumor tissues This paper N/A Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteins Dipalmitoylphosphatidic acid (DPPA) Enzo Life Sciences Cat# BML-LP103 DMSO Sigma-Aldrich Cat# 219605580 Matrigel Vazyme Cat# GL101-03 FGF2 R D Systems Cat# 233-FB-025/CF IFN-γ Bioss Cat# bs-0480R ECM Lonza Cat# CC-3124 DMEM Gibco Cat# 11965092 FBS Gibco Cat# A5256701 Critical commercial assays Angiogenesis PCR Array plate wcgene Cat# WC-MRNA0011-H CCK8 Assay Kit Beyotime Cat# C0037 Evo M-MLV reverse transcription master mix Accurate Biology Cat# AG11706 SYBR Green Master Mix Accutate Biology Cat# AG11701 Experimental models: Cell lines B16-F10 Chinese Academy of Sciences Stem Cell Bank Cat# TCM36 A375 Chinese Academy of Sciences Stem Cell Bank Cat# SCSP-533 Human dermal microvascular endothelial cells (HDMECs) Procell system Cat# CP-H098 Experimental models: Organisms/strains mouse: C57BL/6J Guangdong Medical Laboratory Animal Center Cat# GDMLAC019 mouse: BALB/c nude Guangdong Medical Laboratory Animal Center Cat# GDMLAC07 mouse: BALB/c Guangdong Medical Laboratory Animal Center Cat# GDMLAC01 rat: Sprague-Dawley Guangdong Medical Laboratory Animal Center Cat# GDMLAC02 Oligonucleotides Primers, see Table S1 This paper N/A Software and algorithms GraphPad Prism 8.0.2 GraphPad Software https://www.graphpad.com/ ImageJ 1.8.0 National Institutes of Health https://imagej.net/ ZEN 3.6 ZEISS https://portal.zeiss.com/ Quantity One 4.6.2 Bio-Rad http://www.bio-rad.com Experimental model and study participant details Animals C57BL/6J mice (female, 6 weeks old), BALB/c nude mice (male, 6 weeks old), BALB/c mice (female, 6 weeks old) and Sprague-Dawley rats (male, 7 weeks old) were obtained from the Guangdong Medical Laboratory Animal Center and maintained on a 12-hour day/night cycle at a room temperature of 22 ± 2°C within the Center of Laboratory Animals of Guangdong Pharmaceutical University. All experiments were performed in accordance with the guidelines and protocols approved by the Undergraduate Laboratory Animal Center Ethics Committee of Guangdong Pharmaceutical University (ethical approval number: gdpulacspf2020251). There is no influence of gender on the results of the study. Mice models and treatment To establish subcutaneous tumor models, C57BL/6J mice and BALB/c nude mice were subcutaneously inoculated with B16-F10 cells (10 5 cells per mouse) and A375 cells (5 × 10 5 cells per mouse) into the left frontal flank, respectively. Each model was randomly divided into two groups and treated with DMSO or DPPA (3 mg/kg body weight according to the doses of DPPA tested for breast cancer as previously reported 23 , 24 ) every two days beginning on the seventh day post-inoculation for 9 days (for the B16-F10 subcutaneous tumor model) or 14 days (for the A375 subcutaneous tumor model) via intravenous tail injection. The length (L) and width (W) of the subcutaneous tumors were measured using calipers, and the tumor volume (V) was calculated using the formula V= (L × W2) × 0.5236. After the drug treatment, the tumor tissues were peeled off and weighted. To construct lung metastasis models, B16-F10 cells (105 cells per mouse) and A375 cells (5 × 105 cells per mouse) were injected into C57BL/6J mice and BALB/c nude mice via the caudal vein, respectively. Each model was randomly divided into two groups and treated with DMSO or DPPA (at the same dose indicated above) every two days on the second day after tumor cell injection for 14 days via intravenous tail injection. Afterward, the lung tissues were removed and the lung metastatic foci were further identified. Cell lines Human dermal microvascular endothelial cells (HDMECs, Procell system, Wuhan, China) were maintained in endothelial cell growth medium supplemented with growth supplements (EGM, CC-3124, Lonza), and have been authenticated by Procell system using CD31 immunofluorescence (IF) staining and been tested for mycoplasma contamination. Melanoma B16-F10 and A375 cells were kindly provided by the Chinese Academy of Sciences Stem Cell Bank (Shanghai, China), and were cultured in DMEM (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), and have been authenticated by Chinese Academy of Sciences Stem Cell Bank using STR analysis and been tested for mycoplasma contamination. All cells were added 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 mg/L streptomycin. All the cells were incubated in a humidified atmosphere at 37°C with 5% CO 2 . Method details Cell viability assay B16-F10 cells (2000 cells/well), A375 cells (2000 cells/well), and HDMECs (1,500 cells/well) were seeded into 96-well plates. The indicated concentrations of DMSO and DPPA were subsequently added 24 h later. CCK8 reagent was added to the cells at 24 h or 48 h after drug treatment, and the cells were further incubated at 37°C for 3 h. After incubation, the absorbance was measured at 450 nm using a plate spectrophotometer. Matrigel invasion assay Transwell chambers (8 μm pores, Costar, Cambridge, MA, USA) were coated with dilute Matrigel (1:5 dilution; BD Biosciences, CA, USA) in serum-free DMEM and incubated at 37°C for solidification. The chambers were subsequently placed in a 24-well plate containing 600 μL of DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS in each well. The B16-F10 cells or A375 cells suspended in serum-free DMEM supplemented with DMSO or DPPA were added to the upper chambers. Afterward, the membranes of the chambers were fixed with methanol and stained with 1% crystal violet after 20 h of incubation. The cells that invaded to the lower side of the membranes were counted under a microscope. In vivo Matrigel plug assay Matrigel (500 μL, BD Biosciences, Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA) supplemented with FGF2 (150 ng/mL; R D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA), heparin and DPPA (25 μg) or an equal dose of DMSO was subcutaneously injected into the BALB/c mice. Afterward, the Matrigel plugs were isolated and photographed on the seventh day post-injection. Angiogenesis in the Matrigel plugs was assessed by measuring the microvascular density (MVD) using immunofluorescence (IF) staining for CD31. Rat aortic ring assay The aorta was isolated from Sprague-Dawley rats (male, 7 weeks old). The aorta was cut into segments with lengths of 1-2 mm, rinsed with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and subsequently placed onto a 48-well plate coated with Matrigel Then, the aortic sections were incubated in EGM supplemented with DPPA (8 μM) or an equivalent dose of DMSO for 10 days and photographed. Angiogenesis was analyzed by quantifying the area of microvessels that arose from the aortic sections. Analysis of angiogenesis-related genes expression HDMECs were treated with DMSO or DPPA at a concentration of 10 μM for 48 h, and total RNA was extracted using NucleoZOL reagent (Macherey-Nagel). Total RNA was reverse transcribed using an Evo M-MLV reverse transcription master mix (#AG11706; Accurate Biology), and real-time quantitative PCR analysis was subsequently performed using an angiogenesis PCR array plate (wc-mRNA0011-H; Wcgene Biotech, China) to identify angiogenesis-related genes that may be regulated by DPPA in vascular endothelial cells. The gene fold changes of log2 ≤-2 or ≥2 in the DPPA group compared with the DMSO group were determined and reported. The expression of IFN-γ, CXCL9, CXCL10, CXCL11, and CXCR3 in DPPA- and DMSO-treated HDMECs was further detected using SYBR Green Master Mix (AG11701; Accutate Biology, China). β-actin was used as a loading control. The primers used in this study are listed in Table S1 . Functional annotation Differentially expressed genes (those with a log2 change ≤-2 or ≥2) were further analyzed according to predefined pathways by the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) using the Metascape database according to a previous report. 72 Molecular docking The 3D structure of DPPA was drawn using the ChemDraw tool. The crystal structures of potential receptors of DPPA, including IFN-γ (PDB: 1FG9 ), CXCL9 (PDB: 1J82 ), CXCL10 (PDB: 1O86 ), and CXCL11 (PDB: 1T9J ), were obtained from the RCSB Protein Data Bank ( https://www.rcsb.org/ ). The receptors were edited to remove water molecules and non-relevant ligands, and add hydrogens and charges, and molecular docking simulations between DPPA and target proteins were performed using Autodock Vina Tools (v1.2.7). The binding activity was evaluated on the basis of the binding energy. Furthermore, the interactions of DPPA and the lowest energy minimized pose, including hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic contacts, and electrostatic interactions, were analyzed and visualizated using PyMOL or Discovery Studio. Histological, immunohistological and immunofluorescence The subcutaneous tumor tissues were peeled off and fixed in 10% neutral formalin solution for 24 hours, after which they were embeded in paraffin. Then, the embedded tissues were sectioned into 4-μm-thick slices and stained with hematoxylin-eosin (H E) for histological analysis and with anti-CD34, anti-CD31 and anti-Ki67 antibodies for immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis according to a previous report. 73 The Matrigel plugs were isolated and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 12 hours, embedded in paraffin, and cut into 3-μm-thick sections. Then, the cells were stained with CD31 overnight at 4°C and incubated with DyLight 555-conjugated secondary antibodies for immunofluorescence (IF) staining. The CD31-positive vessels within a 200× field were counted to statistically analyze the microvessel density (MVD). The quantifications were analyzed using ImageJ (NIH, USA). Western blotting HDMECs, A375 cells, or B16 cells were treated with DMSO or DPPA at a concentration of 10 μM for 48 h; then, total proteins were extracted using RIPA buffer (#R0020; Solarbio, China). The proteins were separated by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE). The protein bands on the SDS-PAGE gel were transferred onto polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF, 0.22 μm) membranes and incubated with primary antibodies overnight to assess the expression levels of the proteins. The membranes were further incubated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies, and the immunoreactive bands were visualized and analyzed using an imaging system (Amersham Imager 600, USA). The intensities of the immunoblotting bands were quantified using Quantity One software (Bio-Rad, USA) and normalized to the expression of β-actin, which was used as a loading control. In vitro HDMECs cell migration assay HDMECs were treated with DMSO or DPPA at a concentration of 10 μM for 24 h. Then, the cells were harvested, resuspended in EBM (without growth supplements), added to the appropriate compounds or CXCL-9, -10, -11/CXCR3 signaling antibodies, and placed in the upper compartment of the chamber. Then, the chambers were placed in a well that contained EGM with growth supplements for 10 h. After incubation, the chambers were stained with crystal violet for 15 min. The cells on the upper surface of the filter were carefully removed using a cotton swab, and the lower surfaces of the membranes were photographed. The number of migrated cells was quantified under an inverted light microscope (Olympus BX43, Japan). In vitro HDMECs tube formation assay HDMECs were treated with DMSO or DPPA as indicated above for 24 h. Then, the cells were harvested and added to a Matrigel-coated 96-well plate at a density of 7×10 4 cells per well. Moreover, DMSO, DPPA or relative CXCL-9, -10, -11/CXCR3 signaling antibodies were added to the wells, which were subsequently maintained at 37°C for 5 h to allow the formation of vascular tubes. The tubes were photographed using an inverted light microscope (Zeiss AX10, Germany), and the length of the tubes was quantified using ZEN (ZEISS, German). Quantification and statistical analysis All the data are presented as the means ± standard deviations (SD). Differences between two groups were analyzed using a Student’s two-sided t-test, and differences among more than three groups were analyzed using one-way ANOVA. Differences of tumor volumn between DMSO and DPPA groups were analyzed using two-way ANOVA. A P value less than 0.05 ( P 0.05) was considered to indicate statistical significance. Statistical analysis was conducted using GraphPad Prism 8 (GraphPad Software). Asterisk definition: ∗ P 0.05, ∗∗ P 0.01, ∗∗∗ P 0.001, and ns: P 0.05.