Introduction Breast cancer (BC) in the US population differs by race and ethnicity, and the differences may be useful to inform etiologic questions. Hispanics represent 19.1% of the US population and are the second largest race/ethnic group after non-Hispanic whites (NHW) ( U.S. Census Bureau (RRID:SCR_011587) ). In a review of Surveillance Epidemiology End Results (SEER) data from 2010 to 2019, Hispanic white (HW) females had a lower BC incidence than NHW females with similar relative rates for all age ranges ( Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (RRID:SCR_006902 )). However, BC biology and survival disparities exist in Hispanic females, with improved overall survival but worse breast cancer-specific survival ( 1 – 3 ). BC incidence differences according to Hispanic ethnicity may be related to variation in BC risk factors ( 4 – 8 ). Hispanic females usually have an altered distribution of established risk factors for BC, with several being associated with a lower risk of breast cancer, such as more frequent late menarche, early menopause, younger age at first birth, multiparity, and a lower proportion of first-degree relatives with cancer and benign breast disease (BBD) biopsies as compared to NHW females ( 6 , 7 ). BBD is one of the main risk factors for BC and is common across all adult age groups. The pathologic classification of BBD stratifies groups of females according to future BC risk and is classically categorized as non-proliferative disease (NPD), proliferative disease without atypia (PDWA), or atypical hyperplasia (AH) ( 9 , 10 ). However, epidemiological studies on BBD and BC risk in Hispanic females are limited. Published studies on BBD are mainly limited to NHW females, with a few in African American females ( 11 – 13 ). Accordingly, we analyzed BBD categories and their association with BC risk among HW and NHW in New Mexico (NM), the state with the highest percentage of Hispanics in the US ( U.S. Census Bureau (RRID:SCR_011587) ). Materials and Methods This study aimed to compare the clinicopathological features and outcomes of females with BBD between HW and NHW from the premalignant breast cohort established by the investigators at the University of New Mexico (UNM). A retrospective Institutional Review Board-approved population-based data collection was conducted of the first breast biopsy in females aged 19 years or older residing in six counties of North-Central NM (Bernalillo, Sandoval, Sante Fe, Socorro, Torrance, Cibola/Valencia) between 1996 and mid-2007. Within this biopsy, we selected the College of American Pathologists (CAP) category of the most severe premalignant change according to the following hierarchy: AH PDWA NPD. We excluded females with a history of BC, breast reduction mammoplasty, or implant removal prior to BBD diagnosis or who were diagnosed with BC within 6 months after BBD biopsy, as well as those with fine needle aspirate cytology or cyst. Race and ethnicity were derived from several sources, including pathology, radiology, or other hospital or clinic billing records. Pathology reports regarding the diagnosis of BBD in paper and electronic forms were obtained from medical facilities throughout the six-county region. Based on the proportion of breast cancers in SEER reported by the participating facilities, it is estimated that 96% of benign biopsies in the region were captured. The paper forms were coded by trained medical record abstractors, and electronic text fields were evaluated for the presence of Systemized Nomenclature of Medicine (SNOMED) codes and key terms to determine biopsy characteristics, according to a validated algorithm developed by the authors (DH, AN). Each pathology report was assigned up to 10 codes from the SNOMED clinical classification system. Pathology reports that indicated in situ [ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) and lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS)] or invasive BC at biopsy were excluded. Biopsies that could not be mapped to a CAP class, due to missing information in the electronic pathology reports, were included in all analyses except those by CAP class. Incident and prior BC (DCIS or invasive; LCIS excluded) was ascertained via linkage to the NM SEER registry. Those that developed such within 6 months of benign biopsy were excluded from further study, due to the possibility that cancer was present but missed at benign diagnosis. Statistical Analysis: Associations between biopsy/tumor characteristics and ethnicity were evaluated using chi-square tests, two-sample t-tests, absolute cumulative risks (AR) and relative risks (RRs) with 95% confidence intervals (CI). Females were followed starting at six months post-BBD and ending the earlier of the date of BC, date of death, or end of follow-up. BC ascertainment by the NM SEER registry was considered complete through 12/31/2012; therefore, follow-up for event-free females was truncated at that time. Deaths were identified through linkage to NM state vital statistics files. Relative risks and corresponding 95% CI were calculated by comparing the number of BC in the BBD group to that in the non-BBD group, accounting for age, calendar year, and ethnicity in a Poisson regression model. The non-BBD population was based on the NM SEER six-county age-, year-, and ethnicity-specific females reduced by the BBD population and BC counts. To assess differences between relative risks for HW and NHW females, an interaction term between ethnicity and an indicator of BBD was added to the risk model. The cumulative incidence of BC was calculated for HW and NHW females in the premalignant cohort using Kaplan-Meier curves, and the expected cumulative incidence for the six county regions was calculated using the NM SEER rates described above according to the Ederer I methodology ( 14 ). All analyses were performed in SAS, version 9.4 (SAS Institute), and R, version 4.1.2 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing). Data availability Manuscript data and analysis code are available at Code Ocean ( https://codeocean.com/capsule/3121455 ) Results The findings of this study add to the available landmark studies of BBDs in different races and ethnicities ( Supplemental Table 1 ). A total of 10,271 females with BBD formed the study population (HW = 3684, NHW = 6587) ( Figure 1 ). Most females with BBD were between the ages of 35–54 years, with HW females younger at biopsy than NHW females ( Table 1 ). The types of biopsies were similar between the two groups ( Table 2 ). The frequency patterns of NPD, PDWA and AH were similar between ethnic groups, with NPD identified most commonly; however, we found statistically significant, albeit small magnitude differences between ethnic groups. Specifically, BBD diagnoses among HW showed a higher proportion of NPD compared with NHW. Over more than 130,000 person-years of cumulative post-BBD follow-up (mean 12.8 years per patient), 546 BCs were observed. The RR for BC among all BBD females compared with the SEER population without BBD was 1.87, with similar RRs for HW (RR=1.99; 95% CI 1.69, 2.34) versus NHW (RR= 1.84; 95% CI 1.66, 2.03), ( Table 3 ). RR for BC among all females with AH was three-fold higher than the expected SEER rates (RR=3.10; 95% CI 2.21, 4.34), but less than a two-fold increase was found for NPD and PDWA ( Table 3 ). The underlying population-based BC incidence in the SEER catchment area was somewhat lower for HW females than for NHW females ( Supplemental Table 2 ). There were no significant differences in RRs between HW and NHW females within the NPD, PDWA and AH sub-categories of BBD, although estimates were imprecise for AH (p 0.05 for all, Table 3 ). The overall cumulative incidence of BC was lower for HW but followed a similar pattern of increase during follow-up compared to that of NHW ( Figure 2 ). Cumulative incidence of BC at 5 years adjusted for age and calendar year of biopsy showed higher incidence with increased BBD severity (HW vs. NHW; NPD: 1.4 vs. 2.1%; PDWA: 1.5 vs. 2.7%; and AH: 6 vs. 4.8%). Among all the subsequent BCs that developed, the time to BC, year of BC, proportion of invasive tumors and cancer biologic subtypes did not differ substantially between HW and NHW females ( Table 4 ). For those with high-risk AH lesions, absolute risk at 5 and 10 years was similar, although limited somewhat by a small number of events in the HW AH subgroup with longer follow-up ( Supplemental Table 3 ). Discussion We report one of the first comparisons of BC risks between HW and NHW females in the U.S. population following BBD. Our study shows that HW females with BBD had only slightly lower cumulative incidence of BC compared to NHW females with BBD, similar to findings for BC incidence in SEER by Hispanic ethnicity ( 15 ). In both HW and NHW females, we observed stratification of BC risk based on BBD histologic groups, with the highest risk among females with AH. In addition, the cumulative incidence of BC after 10 years was similar in HW and NHW. These findings imply that with continuation of similar risks with longer-term follow-up, clinical management of BBD should not differ in females of Hispanic ethnicity. Our study of BBD and the development of BC in Hispanic females of NM fills an existing knowledge gap in the literature. Most studies on BBD do not provide ethnic-specific analysis and focus on white females, with a few more recent reports describing BBD in African American and European Spanish females ( Supplemental Table 1 ). The risk factors for BC include BBD among other classical modifiable and non-modifiable factors ( 10 , 13 , 16 , 17 ). Proliferation and atypia are the strongest factors determining the risk of BC after BBD ( 9 , 10 , 18 ), with generally a 2-fold risk of BC in females with PDWA and a higher risk for AH. Similar to other studies of BBD in white American ( 10 ), African American ( 13 ) and European Spanish females diagnosed during the calendar period of our study ( 19 , 20 , 21 ), we observed that NPD was the most frequent subcategory of BBD in HW females (58.6%), with a smaller proportion with PDWA (21.4%), and only 3.6% with AH. Interestingly, we observed a similar BC risk for NPD (RR 1.81) and PDWA (RR 1.85). The two histology groups did not differ in another previous study ( 13 ), while in a number of other studies, NPD had a somewhat lower BC risk ( 9 , 10 , 11 , 16 , 18 ), although confidence intervals often overlapped. It is possible that these findings are valid for the NM population. However, the risk remains elevated for females with BBD, even those with NPD, as has been noted in white American females as well ( 10 ). We found that BC risk was the highest in females with AH, both by relative risk (RR 3.10) and absolute risk and did not differ significantly between HW and NHW females. The 5- and 10-year cumulative incidence risks for AH in the HW and NHW subgroups averaged approximately 1% per year, which is consistent with other published data ( 22 , 23 ). Although AH is not itself a qualifying criterion for supplemental magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) screening, these females should undergo clinical risk estimation using available calculators, as well as regular mammographic screening, and discussions regarding the pros and cons of risk-reducing medication per standard guidelines ( 24 , NCCN (RRID:SCR_012959) ). In our study, there was a slightly lower absolute cumulative risk of BC among HW females compared to NHW females ( Figure 2 ), albeit with similar relative increases in risk based on BBD findings ( Table 3 ). The lower underlying population-based BC incidence in the SEER catchment for HW females than for NHW females ( Supplemental Table 2 ), likely contributed to this lower absolute risk. Other studies of BC risk among other racial/ethnic populations with BBD suggest that the relative risk for BC after a diagnosis of BBD is not dramatically impacted by race/ethnicity, with no difference observed between African American and white American females ( 25 ). Health care providers can consider both absolute and relative BC risks when counseling females with BBD. Regarding the characteristics of BCs that developed in this study, tumors had similar features and subtypes among HW and NHW females and were mainly invasive, as reported in other studies ( 25 , 26 ). In previous studies there was a greater proportion of hormone receptor positive BCs in white American ( 27 ) and triple-negative BCs in African American females following BBD diagnosis ( 28 ). Although the percentage of ER and PR negative tumors was somewhat higher in HW vs NHW females in our study, the overall number of tumors was small. Our study has several strengths and limitations. This is one of the first studies of BBD in U.S. Hispanic females where later breast cancer events were included in the follow-up. The study includes six counties of NM that represent both urban and rural, as well as socioeconomically diverse regions and hence, the results can provide a window for similar populations. We were able to access the SEER registry data to ascertain breast cancer incidence. As the study was conducted as a demonstration project, information on emigration and deaths was incomplete. Although this may result in person-time that is overestimated in the computation of the RRs, it should also produce conservative cumulative incidence estimates. However, these limitations were minimized by comparing two different populations in the same NM geographic location with the corresponding BC incidence rates from SEER. Pathology was classified according to the original diagnostic reports, which also improves the generalizability of the results since most clinicians rely on diagnostic reports when assessing patient risk. The study findings reflect trends in clinical practice only for the included years. We found that BBD characteristics and BC risks were overall similar in Hispanic white and non-Hispanic white females. The resulting BCs after the diagnosis of BBDs also had comparable features. Hispanic white females with BBD can be counseled according to their absolute risk of BC after a benign biopsy. Supplementary Material 1 2 3