The most common cancers in American Indians/Alaska Natives (AI/ANs) are breast, colorectal, lung, and prostate cancers. 1 , 2 Overall, AI/ANs have lower cancer incidence, but worse five-year survival outcomes, than non-Hispanic Whites (NHWs) for these cancers. 1 – 3 American Indians/Alaska Natives are also more likely to present with late-stage, metastatic cancers, and this is particularly notable for cancers for which screening is available, including breast, colorectal, and prostate cancers. 4 – 6 Thus, differences in stage at diagnosis may be partly driving the disparity in health outcomes for AI/AN compared with NHW cancer patients. Regular access to primary health care services, including screening in asymptomatic patients and early diagnosis in symptomatic patients, is associated with early stage at diagnosis for cancer patients. 7 , 8 However, AI/ANs face several barriers to accessing primary care, including limited insurance coverage, lack of transportation, few nearby health care facilities, high costs of health care services, and mistrust of health care providers. 9 – 11 The Indian Health Service Care System (IHSCS), including Indian Health Service, Tribal, and Urban facilities, provides a potential avenue to reduce barriers to primary care in AI/ANs, because IHSCS clinics offer free primary care services, including cancer screening, to eligible AI/ANs. Additionally, IHSCS clinics tend to be located close to, or within, tribal areas, making them accessible to AI/ANs who may have limited transportation options. However, IHSCS services are restricted to AI/ANs who are members of federally-recognized tribes or who meet other eligibility criteria, so not all AI/ANs are enrolled in the IHSCS. The objective of this study was to evaluate whether AI/AN race is associated with a higher likelihood of having a late-stage cancer diagnosis and to determine if this association differs between AI/ANs with and without IHSCS enrollment. Because IHSCS may help reduce some barriers to cancer screening in AI/ANs, we hypothesize that AI/AN cancer patients with IHSCS enrollment will have a stage distribution that is more similar to NHWs than AI/AN cancer patients without IHSCS. Methods Study population. We conducted a case-case comparison study using Medicare enrollment files and IHSCS enrollment records linked to the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results cancer registry data (SEER-Medicare). We used the SEER-Medicare linked database to identify new cases of breast (women only), colorectal, lung, or prostate cancer who were: 1) diagnosed between 2001 and 2007, 2) residing in a SEER catchment area, 3) enrolled in Medicare parts A and B one year or longer prior to diagnosis, and 4) AI/AN or NHW. Those who were enrolled in Medicare due to disability or end-stage renal disease were excluded. Approval for this study was granted by the Institutional Review Boards of the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, State of Washington, Oregon Department of Public Health, Oregon Department of Health Services, California Rural Indian Health Board, Northwest Portland Area Indian Health Board, California Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects, and the California Department of Health Care Services. Statistical analysis. Stage at diagnosis was dichotomized into early-stage (SEER local/regional stages) or late-stage (SEER distant stage) disease. We used logistic regression models to compare the odds of a late-stage diagnosis between AI/AN and NHW cancer patients. Models included the following adjustment variables: age, sex, diagnosis year, marital status, geographic region, ZIP code-level median income, type of residence according to ZIP code rural-urban commuting area codes, and Klabunde co-morbidity score at diagnosis. 12 We also conducted separate analyses to determine the association between late-stage disease and AI/AN race for those who were, and were not, enrolled in the IHSCS. Enrollment in the IHSCS was ascertained using the SEER-Medicare data that had been linked to IHSCS enrollment files. Results After excluding patients missing stage at diagnosis (approximately 5% of cancer patients), analyses included 285,993 NHWs and 1,126 AI/ANs diagnosed with breast, colorectal, lung, or prostate cancer during the study period. Compared with NHWs, AI/AN cancer patients tended to be younger, were less likely to be married, and were more likely to live in rural areas and in areas with lower ZIP code-level median incomes ( Table 1 ). In analyses not accounting for IHSCS enrollment, the adjusted odds of presenting with late-stage disease was higher in AI/ANs compared with NHWs diagnosed with breast (OR=2.20, CI: 1.40–3.44) or prostate (OR=2.01, CI: 1.39–2.90) cancer ( Table 2 ). The association between late-stage cancer and AI/AN race was strongest for AI/ANs without IHSCS enrollment for both breast and prostate cancers. AI/AN breast cancer cases not enrolled in IHSCS were greater than three times more likely (CI: 1.8–5.5) to be diagnosed with late-stage cancers than NHWs. For prostate cancer, AI/AN patients without IHSCS enrollment were 2.5 times more likely (CI: 1.6, 4.3) to be diagnosed with late-stage disease than NHWs, but there was not a significant difference in the distribution of late-stage breast or prostate between NHW and IHSCS enrolled AI/AN patients. For colorectal and lung cancers, there was a 17–21% increased odds of late-stage disease in AI/ANs, but this was not statistically significant, and these associations did not change according to IHSCS eligibility status ( Table 2 ). Conclusions Our results suggest that older AI/AN cancer patients enrolled in Medicare were more likely than NHW cancer patients to be diagnosed with late-stage cancer, particularly for breast and prostate cancers. These results highlight the reality that barriers to care in AI/ANs extend beyond differences in health insurance coverage. 9 – 11 However, our analyses also suggested that enrollment in IHSCS reduced the disparity in the proportion of patients with a late-stage cancer diagnoses between AI/ANs and NHWs. This may be due, in part, to increased access to primary care and cancer screening services in AI/ANs with IHSCS enrollment. Results from a recent qualitative study of mammography in AI/ANs also support the hypothesis that the IHSCS may help bridge the gap in access to cancer early detection resources for AI/ANs. 13 However, further research is needed to determine if interventions to increase access to primary care and cancer screening services in AI/ANs can improve the early detection of cancer in this population and improve survival outcomes.