Introduction While the overall incidence of invasive breast cancer is low in individuals under 40 years of age, this younger subset of patients develops more aggressive cancer and has advanced stage disease at the time of diagnosis, owing in part to the lack of routine mammography screening in young patients [ 1 ]. The molecular subtypes of breast cancer that confer an aggressive disease course when diagnosed at a young age are debated but can include triple negative (estrogen and progesterone receptor negative, HER2 normal, including basal cancers) breast cancer (TNBC), as well as the hormone receptor positive, or luminal B subtype [ 2 , 3 ]. Multivariate analyses indicate that a young age at diagnosis is an independent predictor of poor outcome after accounting for established covariates such as tumor size, histology, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status [ 3 – 13 ]. Young breast cancer patients are often treated aggressively and endure side effects without superior outcomes [ 14 – 19 ]. Mortality rates of young patients declined from 1989–2010, but more recently have shown a nonsignificant increase [ 20 ], in contrast to consistent declines in mortality in older patients. The causes of aggressive disease in young breast cancer patients remain poorly understood. Few genetic events are significantly linked to those tumors diagnosed at a young age [ 21 , 22 ], with the exceptions of mutations in BRCA1/2 [ 23 ], p53 [ 24 ], GATA3 [ 25 ], and ARID1A [ 26 ]. Preliminary reports suggest that circulating tumor cells [ 27 ], gene and miRNA expression profiles [ 28 , 29 ], epigenetic alterations [ 30 ], and immune modulation [ 31 ] may contribute to disease aggressiveness in young patients. Socioeconomic status, adherence to initial and follow-up care [ 32 , 33 ], post-therapy weight gain [ 34 ], and complexity in decision making post-neoadjuvant therapy [ 35 ] have been linked to a young age at diagnosis but, where studied, response to specific molecular therapies was age-independent [ 36 ]. Few age-specific therapeutic strategies have been identified [ 37 , 38 ]. Brain metastases are devastating complications of breast cancer at any age, with both the lesions and their treatments causing severe neurocognitive and physical complications. Multiple factors likely contribute to brain metastatic colonization, including genetic evolution from the primary tumor [ 39 ], the restriction of drug uptake by the blood-tumor barrier [ 40 ], and molecular cross-talk between tumor cells and the brain microenvironment. Breast cancer patients diagnosed at a young age have an increased incidence of brain metastases [ 41 – 47 ]. While not testing age directly, the Cittelly lab demonstrated a role for estrogens in TNBC brain metastasis in mice by activating ER+ astrocytes to produce tumor-stimulatory factors [ 48 ]. In four mouse models of TNBC and luminal B breast cancer, we demonstrated approximately three-fold more brain metastases developed in young mice than in older hosts [ 21 ]. Age-related alterations in the numbers and activity of brain microglia and/or infiltrating myeloid cells were quantified, with a series of downstream effects on astrocytic activation in uninvolved brain and myeloid production of Semaphorin 3a in the neuroinflammatory response [ 21 ]. This list of potential causative factors is undoubtedly incomplete as brain metastases are rarely biopsied, and obtaining healthy aged mice is difficult. Should any of these pathways be mechanistically validated and druggable, it may be possible to test age-specific prevention and treatment strategies for brain metastases in young patients. The normal brain is comprised of neurons, a protective blood-brain barrier, oligodendrocytes that produce myelin sheaths, astrocytes that connect neurons to the circulation, microglia, and blood-derived myeloid cells [ 49 ]. Normal brain aging is associated with alterations in blood-brain barrier integrity, inflammation, metabolism, and cell death [ 50 – 52 ]. The blood-brain barrier becomes a blood-tumor barrier with heterogeneous and low permeability to drugs and probes, including altered water channel function [ 53 ]. A neuroinflammatory response develops around a metastasis (also termed astrogliosis, radial scar) consisting of amoeboid microglia and activated (GFAP+) astrocytes in the metastatic microenvironment. The normal brain is immune privileged, but inflammatory and immune cells infiltrate the metastatic microenvironment to varying degrees together with activated microglia [ 54 , 55 ]. Extravasated metastatic tumor cells adhere to the abluminal side of blood-tumor barrier, in contact with the microenvironment, and proliferate to form clusters or ‘nests’ [ 56 ]. These tumor nests are thought to coalesce into a larger MRI-detectable metastases [ 56 , 57 ], which contain trapped areas of microenvironment [ 58 ]. Using a mouse model of brain-tropic TNBC, we independently harvested tumor metastases, the tumor-adjacent metastatic microenvironment, and the uninvolved brain by LMD from young and old mice for quantitative proteomic analysis using liquid chromatography, high resolution tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). We report a proteomic identification of 5,136 human proteins from the tumor metastases, and 7,474 mouse proteins from the stroma (metastatic microenvironment and uninvolved brain). Of these, 322, 996, and 515 were differentially expressed with age (limma p 0.05) in the metastases, metastatic microenvironment, and uninvolved brain, respectively. Differentially expressed proteins between young and older mice were most striking in the metastatic microenvironment, where IPA analysis revealed the activation of a plethora of pathways limited to young mice. Materials and Methods Cell culture MDA-MB-231 and brain-tropic MDA-MB-231BR cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin. 4T1-BR5 cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS. JIMT-1-BR lines were cultured in DMEM with 10% Fetal Bovine serum and supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine. Immortalized human astrocytes (HAL) were cultured in Astrocyte Medium (#1801, ScienCell) containing fetal bovine serum (FBS, Cat. No. 0010), astrocyte growth supplement (AGS, Cat. No. 1852), and penicillin/streptomycin solution (P/S, Cat. No. 0503). Immortalized human pericytes (HPL) were grown in Pericyte Medium (#1201, ScienCell) containing fetal bovine serum, pericyte growth supplement (PGS, Cat. No. 1252), and penicillin/streptomycin solution. The mouse brain endothelial cell line (bEnd.3) was cultured in complete classic medium containing serum and Culture Boost (#4Z0–500, Cell Systems). Human cerebral endothelial cell line (hCMEC/D3) was cultured in EndoGRO-MV complete culture media Kit with added bFGF (1 ng/ml). All cell lines above were cultured as previously described [ 59 ], and were authenticated by DNA fingerprinting through the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and tested negative for Mycoplasma . Brain metastasis experiment and tissue specimen acquisition All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of the Laboratory Animal Sciences Program, Frederick National Lab prior to initiation. To establish brain metastases, 1.75 × 10 5 MDA-MB-231-BR cells suspended in 100 μl sterile PBS were injected into five young (2.5 months) versus five old (14 months) female athymic nude (nu/nu) mice with aid of ultrasound into the left cardiac ventricle under isoflurane anesthesia [ 21 ]. One month after inoculation, mice were anesthetized with isoflurane and transcardially perfused with cold Krebs-Ringer solution (#J67591.K24, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Perfusion was performed with a syringe perfusion pump at a flow rate of 10 ml/min for 1 min. The descending aorta was completely clamped by a hemostat throughout the perfusion. Fresh frozen (FF) whole brain specimens were embedded in optimal cutting temperature (OCT) medium for sectioning or tissue lysate preparation. Athymic female nu/nu virgin mice were used at 2 months (young) and 13 months (older) as healthy controls and at 6 months (young) and 18 months (older) as metastasis-bearing animals for Western blot analysis. Histological preparation and review of brain tissue specimens OCT-embedded mouse brain specimens were histologically sectioned into 10 μm sagittal sections via cryotome from eight spatially separated depths from each specimen block to ensure adequate representation of the metastatic burden throughout the entirety of the brain. Tissue sections were placed onto one representative glass slide for review plus five slides containing polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) membranes (Leica Microsystems) for LMD at each depth. A total of 80 tissue sections for LMD (2 sections/slide; 40 slides) and 16 representative sections on glass slides (2 sections/slide; 8 slides) were prepared. All slides were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H E), with phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich) added to the 70% ethanol fixative and first DEPC water for the LMD slides, as previously described [ 60 ]. Representative H E-stained slides were scanned using an Aperio ScanScope XT slide scanner (Leica Microsystems). One representative PEN membrane slide per brain was imaged before and after LMD of each cellular subpopulation. Laser microdissection LMD was performed on the LMD7 system (Leica Microsystems) for enrichment of tumor metastasis cell populations, the tumor-adjacent metastatic microenvironment, and the uninvolved brain obtained from the contralateral hemisphere of the brain, as available. Cross-sectional target areas 30 mm 2 were collected via LMD into LC-grade water to support sample preparation for proteomic analysis by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) [ 61 ]. Sample preparation and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis LMD tissue collections were digested and labeled with isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT11), as previously described [ 60 ]. LMD enriched metastasis samples (n=10 samples; 15 μg/sample) were labeled with TMT11 reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) per manufacturer’s instructions. A representative pooled channel comprised of equivalent amounts of peptide digest from all samples was labeled and included in each multiplex. Metastasis sample multiplexes were organized into a single multiplex (165 μg total) while LMD enriched metastatic microenvironment or uninvolved brain samples (n=10 samples each; 40 μg/sample) were similarly labeled and organized into two evenly distributed TMT11 multiplexes (440 μg total/plex). The metastasis and metastatic microenvironment/uninvolved brain sample multiplexes were fractionated by basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) and pooled into 12 and 36 concatenated fractions, respectively, as previously described [ 60 ]. Approximately 2 μg/fraction from each of the 3 multiplexes was taken for global proteomics. Fractions were resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to yield approximately 0.85 μg per 10 μl injection and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a nanoflow high-performance LC (HPLC) system (EASY-nLC 1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online with a Q Exactive HF-X MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific), as previously described [ 60 , 61 ]. Briefly, peptides were loaded on a reversed-phase trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 20 mm, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and eluted from a heated (50 °C) reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 500 mm, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher Scientific) by developing a linear gradient of 2% mobile phase B (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 32% mobile phase B over 120 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The electrospray source capillary voltage and temperature were set at 2.1 kV and 275 °C, respectively. Full scan mass spectra (MS) were acquired using a mass range of m/z 400–1600, followed by selection of the top 12 most intense molecular ions in each MS scan for high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Instrument parameters were as follows: Full MS: AGC, 3 × 10 6 ; resolution, 60 k; S-Lens RF, 40%; max IT, 45 ms; MS2: AGC, 10 5 ; resolution, 45 k; max IT, 95 ms; quadrupole isolation, 1.0 m/z ; isolation offset, 0.2 m/z ; NCE, 34; first mass, 100; intensity threshold, 2 × 10 5 ; charge state, 2–4; dynamic exclusion, 20 s; TMT Optimization, On. All data were collected in Profile mode. Quantitative proteomic data processing pipeline Peptide identifications were generated by searching the RAW data files with a publicly-available, combined non-redundant human and mouse proteome database (Swiss-Prot, 20,243 Homo sapiens sequences, 16,944 Mus musculus sequences, 12–04-2017; http://www.uniprot.org/ ) appended with porcine trypsin using Mascot (Matrix Science; v.2.6.0), Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific; v2.2.0.388), and in-house software tools [ 60 , 61 ]. The RAW data files corresponding to each LC-MS/MS injection of the 36 or 12 concatenated offline high pH RPLC-fractions for a given TMT11 multiplex were searched using the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance of 0.05 Da, a maximum of two tryptic miscleavages, static modification for TMT reporter ion tags (229.1629 Da) on peptide N-termini and lysine residues and dynamic modifications for oxidation (15.9949 Da) on methionine residues. The resulting peptide spectral matches (PSMs) are filtered using a false-discovery rate (FDR) 1.0% (q-value 0.01), as determined by the Percolator [ 62 ] module of Proteome Discoverer. TMT reporter ion intensities were extracted using Proteome Discoverer at a mass tolerance of 20 ppm. PSMs lacking a TMT reporter ion signal in TMT channel m/z 126 (TMT-126, the pooled study reference combined from all patient sample digests), PSMs lacking TMT reporter ion intensity in all TMT channels, or PSMs exhibiting an isolation interference of ≥50% were excluded from downstream analyses. For global protein-level abundance, the abundance of proteins identified by unique PSMs (i.e. in which a PSM maps uniquely to a single protein accession) was determined by calculating the median Log 2 -transformed abundance ratios of all PSMs corresponding to a unique protein accession. The abundance of PSMs mapping to multiple proteins (i.e. “multi-mapper” PSMs) were compared to mapped, unique protein abundances using a mean squared error approach to enable their assignment to unique proteins based on comparative abundance analyses. Briefly, mean squared Log 2 -transformed abundance ratios were calculated for multi-mapper PSMs with intensity data observed in ≥50% of all TMT channels for a given TMT sample plex; redundant and multiply charged versions of a given PSM were considered as unique molecular events. Multi-mapper PSMs were then assigned to the corresponding unique protein accession exhibiting the smallest difference in relative abundance levels comparatively. Multi-mapper PSMs mapping to protein accessions not identified by any unique PSMs were excluded from downstream analyses. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) that mapped to both human and mouse accessions were manually reconciled and assigned to either human (for LMD enriched metastasis samples) or mouse (for LMD enriched metastatic microenvironment and uninvolved brain samples) accessions. PSMs mapping exclusively to mouse accessions in the LMD enriched metastasis samples (14.2% of all PSMs measured in the LMD enriched tumor multiplex) and human accessions in the LMD enriched metastatic microenvironment/uninvolved brain samples ( 10% of all PSMs measured in the two LMD enriched stroma multiplexes) were removed. The remaining mouse-specific PSMs in the LMD enriched multiplexes were normalized by calculating the mode-centered z-score transformation for each channel and Log 2 -transformed as previously described [ 61 ]. The remaining human-specific PSMs in the LMD enriched metastasis multiplex were normalized to an artificial pool using mean TMT reporter ion channel abundances, followed by Log 2 transformation. Normalized Log 2 -transformed protein-level abundances for each TMT11 multiplex were merged and the protein-level abundances for proteins not quantified in all patient samples, but in at least ≥50%, were imputed using a k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) strategy using the pamr prediction analysis for microarrays R-package [ 63 ]. Cell lysate preparation MDA-MB-231BR cells were washed twice in 1× PBS. Cells were lysed on ice for 10 min in 1× RIPA lysis buffer (Millipore Sigma) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete ™ , Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail; Roche) as previously described [ 64 ]. Lysed cells were scraped, and supernatants were collected by centrifugating at 16,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C. Lysate protein yield was quantitated by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) analysis (Pierce) and frozen at −80 °C until use. Tissue lysate preparation Brain specimens with or without metastases, as described in methods above, were pulverized using the CP01 cryoPREP Manual Dry Pulverizer (Covaris) and resuspended in 1× RIPA lysis buffer (Millipore Sigma) supplemented with cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). Samples were briefly homogenized for 10 s (medium pulse, two times) on ice using a hand-held plastic disposable generator probe (Fisher Scientific), then incubated for 20 min on ice. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C. Protein yield was quantitated by BCA assay. Immunoblotting Twenty μg of total protein were resolved on 4%–20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX Gels (Bio-Rad Laboratories) [ 64 ]. Proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membrane using Trans-Blot Turbo Mini Nitrocellulose Transfer Packs (Bio-Rad Laboratories). The membranes were incubated with Intercept Blocking Buffer (LI-COR Biosciences) for 1 h at room temperature and incubated at 4 °C overnight with primary antibodies against TNC (ab108930, Abcam) and β-actin (A5441, Millipore Sigma) diluted in Tris-buffered saline containing 0.2% Tween-20 (TBST). The membranes were washed three times in 0.1% TBST, 10 min each, and incubated with secondary antibody at room temperature for 1 h. After secondary incubation, the membranes were washed with TBST and visualized using the PXi multiapplication gel imaging system (Syngene). Gene silencing TNC-targeting MISSION shRNA lentiviral particles (pLKO.1-puro) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (stable selection marker: Puromycin). The lentiviral transduction particles (10 6 particles/ml) were used to infect MDA-MB-231-BR and 4T1-BR5 cells and stable cells were selected using puromycin. Three different constructs targeting human TNC (GGAGTACTTTATCCGTGTATT, CAGGCGCAAACGGGCATAAAT, CCAGTGACAACATCGCAATAG) and mouse TNC (GGGTCACTGAGTACCTCATTA, GCATCAACACAACCA GTCTAA, TCGAAACATGGGAGATCATTT) were used for silencing TNC, as well as a non-targeted scrambled control. Migration assay (Wound-healing assay) For the migration assay, 2.5 × 10 5 cells/well (MDA-MB-231BR, 4T1-BR5, or TNC knockdown stable cells) were plated into 6-well plates in 10% FBS containing growth medium [ 64 ]. The 6-well plates were coated with Collagen IV (15 μg/ml) and TNC (25 μg/ml) for 1 h at room temperature prior to cell seeding. Cells were grown for 24 h to attain ~70–80% confluency. An outer horizontal line was drawn on the 6-well plate to mark the scratch area. A vertical scratch was made in the center of each well using a P1000 pipette tip which bisects the outer horizontal line. Cells were washed to remove debris, and growth medium containing 0.25% FBS was added. The specific scratch area was photographed using a phase contrast microscope (10×) and marked as time zero (0 h). The same area was photographed after 24 and 48 h, and the percent area open of each well was calculated using ImageJ. The percent (%) area closed was calculated by subtracting the area closed at 24 h to area closed at 0 h for each well. Cellular viability assay MDA-MB-231BR, 4T1-BR5 or stable TNC knockdown cells (10,000 cells/well) were plated in 96-well plates [ 64 ]. After 24 or 48 h, viability was measured by incubating cells for 3–5 h in culture medium supplemented (1:10) with Alamar Blue (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Viability was quantitated via fluorescence at 560/590 nm (excitation/emission) as % Viability = (Fluorescence of overexpressing cells/Fluorescence of the vector) × 100. Boyden chamber motility assay Motility assays were performed as described previously [ 64 ]. Briefly, 4T1-BR5 cells (1 × 10 5 cells/ml) in DMEM (56 μl) were plated into the upper wells of Boyden chamber. The upper and lower chambers are separated by a polyvinyl membrane (8 μm) coated overnight with 5 μg/ml of collagen type I. Excess collagen type I was removed by PBS wash (30 min). Chemoattractant (1% FBS, TNC 25 μg/ml, IgG Fc-100 μg/ml, or PBS-0.1% BSA) was added to the lower chamber wells. Cells were incubated in a humidified chamber at 37 °C and 5% CO 2 for 4 h to allow migration, after which those that had migrated to the undersurface of the membrane were fixed and stained with Diff-Quik solutions (Dade-Behring). Non-migrated cells were discarded. The number of migrated cells is plotted as the mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM) (n=3). Quantification and statistical analyses Differential expression analyses using global proteomic data was performed using limma (v3.46.0, [ 65 ]) in R. Proteins passing a limma unadjusted p 0.05 were prioritized for supervised hierarchical clustering using Pearson correlations and plotted in heatmaps using Clustvis (v.1.2.1) in R (version 4.0.2). We used the commercial QIAGEN’s Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software for the functional pathway analysis of differentially expressed proteins identified in this study using a t p-value 0.05 as the significant threshold. Lists were filtered to include only significantly altered pathways (i.e., those with -log[pvalue] 1.3). PCA plots were generated using ggplot2 (v.3.3.4). P-values from differential analysis are reported as unadjusted or adjusted for multiple comparisons, when significant. All in vitro experiments were repeated at least three times unless specified. Statistical significance of in vitro assays was calculated by using one-way ANOVA (*, p 0.05; **, p 0.01; ***, p 0.001; ****, p 0.0001). Data availability The mass spectrometry proteomic data have been deposited at the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository [ 66 ], with dataset identifier PXD042346. Results Experimental design Young (2.5 months) and old (14 months) nude mice, five per group, were injected in the left cardiac ventricle with a brain-tropic human cell line model of triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) brain metastasis (MDA-MB-231-BR) and developed brain metastases at age-specific frequencies, as previously reported [ 21 ]. Mice were perfused under deep anesthesia before necropsy to remove circulatory system proteins. Enriched cellular populations of the metastatic mass, the tumor microenvironment, and the uninvolved brain from the same region on the opposite hemisphere were harvested using LMD for quantitative proteomic analysis ( Fig. 1 ). Histology-resolved proteomic analysis quantified 5,136 human proteins from the metastases ( Supplemental Table 1 ) and 7,474 mouse proteins from the metastatic microenvironment and uninvolved brain ( Supplemental Table 2 ). Principal component analysis (PCA) of samples is shown in Supplemental Fig. 1 . Differential analysis identified 322, 996, and 515 proteins with age-dependent protein abundance alterations (limma p 0.05) in the metastasis ( Supplemental Table 3 ), metastatic microenvironment ( Supplemental Table 4 ), and uninvolved brain ( Supplemental Table 5 ), respectively ( Supplemental Fig. 2 ). Age-dependent expression of human tumor proteins Despite the same established brain-tropic tumor cell line being injected into the mice, 322 human proteins were differentially abundant (limma p 0.05) in the metastases of old versus young mice, of which 263 proteins (82%) were elevated in older hosts ( Fig. 2A , Supplemental Fig. 2 , Supplemental Table 3 ). IPA analysis revealed elevation of several pathways associated with tumorigenesis in metastases from older mice, despite their lower propensity to metastasize, including pathways driven by hormones (Prolactin, Aldosterone), growth factors (Neuregulin, ERBB), angiogenic factors (VEGF), and interleukins (IL-3, IL-6) ( Fig. 2B , Supplemental Table 6 ). Metabolic pathways elevated in older mouse metastases were related to isoleucine and valine degradation, and the biosynthesis and degradation of phosphoinositide compounds. Interestingly, in vivo nutritional imbalance mediated through the administration of amino acid solutions depleted for isoleucine, leucine, and valine reduced hepatoma formation in rats [ 67 ]. Necroptosis and ferroptosis pathways were elevated in older tumors, which could limit metastasis [ 68 – 70 ]. Only four pathways were significantly elevated (p 0.05) in young mouse metastases: HIPPO signaling, apelin endothelial signaling, production of nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species in macrophages, and ERK/MAPK signaling ( Fig. 2B , Supplemental Table 6 ). The HIPPO pathway is poorly studied in brain metastases but is known to promote invasion and metastasis [ 71 ] and is regulated by normal aging [ 72 ]. Apelin regulates angiogenesis, energy metabolism, obesity-related pathways, and enhances tumorigenesis in different experimental systems [ 73 ]. Mouse models of TNBC have demonstrated that elevated apelin expression (comparable to the level of apelin expression in obese mice) contributes to higher rates of brain metastasis [ 74 ]. ROS and nitrogen oxide are produced in response to mitochondrial stress, tumorigenesis, metastasis, mTOR activation, and angiogenesis/vasodilation [ 75 , 76 ]. Elevated expression of ROS-related proteins in brain metastases of breast cancers correlates with poorer patient survival [ 77 ]. These observations contrast a well-known role of increased ROS in normal brain aging [ 78 , 79 ]. Therapeutic use of inhibitors targeting ERK/MAPK signaling provides clinical benefit in vivo on brain metastasis as monotherapy and in rational combinations [ 80 , 81 ]. In conclusion, based on our IPA-based pathway analysis and literature review, the major up-regulated signaling pathways in older mouse brain metastases are involved in physiological and pathological processes, including amino acid metabolism, hormone and growth factor signaling, and necroptosis. Conversely, four significantly activated pathways in young mouse brain metastases are related to the promotion of angiogenesis, tumor cell growth, invasion, and metastasis. Differentially expressed proteins in old versus young uninvolved brain Differential analysis revealed 515 proteins significantly altered (limma p 0.05) by age in the uninvolved brain, most of which were elevated in older mice ( Fig. 3A , Supplemental Fig. 2 , Supplemental Table 5 ). Pathways relating to metabolism (oxidative phosphorylation, 3-phosphoinositide biosynthesis), multifaceted signaling (RHOGDI, ephrin, α-adrenergic, CXCR4, protein kinase A, semaphorins, adrenomedullin, SNARE, and AHR), neuronal signaling (CNTF, NGF), autophagy-lysosomal (CLEAR), hypertrophy, and necroptosis were elevated in the old uninvolved brain relative to young uninvolved brain ( Fig. 3B , Supplemental Table 7 ). Of these, age-specific alterations have been previously described in the normal or pathologic brain indicate a similar enrichment of semaphorin signaling [ 82 , 83 ], necroptosis regulation of a neuroinflammatory response [ 84 ], adrenomedullin signaling [ 85 ], and the AMP-activated protein kinase component of oxidative phosphorylation [ 86 ]. Individual differentially expressed proteins include Prom1 (CD133) which was the most significantly enriched protein (by Log 2 FC) in both the microenvironment (limma adj. p 0.0001; Supplemental Table 4 ) and the uninvolved brain (limma adj. p 0.001; Supplemental Table 5 ) from young versus older mice. Prom1 has known functions in brain stem cells, oligodendrocyte formation, myelination, memory, and cognitive performance [ 87 ]. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) was enriched in both the microenvironment (limma p 0.05; Supplemental Table 4 ) and the uninvolved brain (limma p 0.01; Supplemental Table 5 ) from young mice. ACE2 is a surface receptor protein involved in the regulation of circulating angiotensin II levels and is highly expressed in the small intestine and kidneys [ 88 ]. In the brain, ACE2 is exclusively expressed in endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells [ 89 ]. While the literature largely suggests a tumor suppressive role for ACE2 in several types of cancer, including breast cancer [ 90 ], a recent study found high expression of ACE2 in primary and metastatic tumors from HER2-positive and basal-like breast cancer subtypes, which further correlated with poor prognosis in HER2-positive breast cancer patients [ 91 ]. Additional proteins significantly enriched in uninvolved brain of young mice included the extracellular matrix protein TNC, the blood-brain barrier protein transferrin receptor protein 1 (TFRC), multiple transporters, and proteins involved in maintaining brain function, including opalin ( Supplemental Table 5 ). Expression of TFRC in the striatum, hippocampus, and substantia nigra [ 92 ], and opalin [ 93 ] are reduced during normal and/or pathologic brain aging. IPA pathway analysis identified RHOGDI signaling pathway and Huntington’s Disease signaling pathway as significantly enriched in young uninvolved tissue ( Fig. 3B ). Aging is a ubiquitous biological phenomenon distinguished by a gradual deterioration in functional capacity and an increased susceptibility to diseases over time. Our functional pathway enrichment analysis using IPA confirmed known aging alterations and provided a comprehensive list of enriched signaling pathways linked to the regulation of cellular metabolism, autophagy, hypertrophy, and necroptosis. The metastatic microenvironment Of the 996 microenvironmental proteins differentially abundant with age, 823 were enriched in younger hosts while 173 were enriched in older animals ( Fig. 4 , Supplemental Fig. 2 , Supplemental Table 4 ). Pathway analysis using the proteins variably abundant by age in the metastatic microenvironment revealed several metabolic alterations enriched in young mice, including oxidative phosphorylation, the biosynthesis of triacylglycerol, cholesterol, phosphatidylglycerol, inositol tetrakisphosphates, phosphoinositide, and pyrimidine ribonucleotides, and the degradation of phosphoinositide, guanosine nucleotides, and purine nucleotides ( Fig. 5A ). The contributions of oxidative phosphorylation to the endothelial, neuronal, and neuroinflammatory aspects of the brain under physiological and pathological conditions are not fully understood but may be controlled by inflammatory signals [ 94 , 95 ]. Several cholesterol biosynthetic pathways were elevated in the young metastatic microenvironment. The brain contains the greatest concentration of cholesterol in the body, which contributes to myelination and steroid hormone synthesis, and is a structural component of the cell membrane [ 96 ]. The import of lipoproteins across the blood-brain barrier is restricted, thus brain cells critically need to synthesize cholesterol themselves to meet cellular needs. Astrocytes secrete cholesterol, which is shuttled by apolipoprotein E (APOE) and taken up by neurons [ 97 ]. Cholesterol is also important for phagocytosis by microglia (reviewed in [ 98 ]). Several kinase-mediated signaling pathways were elevated in the young metastatic microenvironment ( Fig. 5B ). The PI3K/AKT pathway has been validated as a preventive and therapeutic target for brain metastases [ 99 , 100 ]. PI3K activates pro-metastatic macrophages and microglia in the brain metastatic microenvironment [ 101 ]. Signaling via RHO [ 102 ], RAC [ 103 ], angiopoietin [ 104 , 105 ], WNT [ 101 ], and CNTF [ 106 ] have been implicated in glial or endothelial responses in the brain metastatic microenvironment. Other pathways involving brain proteins have been identified in brain physiology and pathophysiology, but not yet been described in the brain metastatic microenvironment include signaling by integrin [ 107 ], HIF1α [ 108 ], CDK5 [ 109 ], ID1 [ 110 ], HGF [ 111 ], NF-kB [ 112 ], EIF2 [ 113 ], the insulin superfamily [ 114 ], ERK/MAPK [ 115 , 116 ], HER2 [ 117 ], JAK/STAT [ 118 , 119 ], RON [ 120 , 121 ], thrombin[ 122 ], relaxin [ 123 ], sphingosine-1-phosphate [ 124 , 125 ], and telomerase [ 126 ]. The young metastatic microenvironment had significantly higher abundances of several proteins involved in inflammatory signaling and immune infiltration ( Fig. 5C ), characterized by pathways associated with signaling from macrophages, microglia, NK cells, eosinophils, and neutrophils. Adaptive immune pathways were not differentially enriched due to the use of nude mice. Several of the interleukin/cytokine pathways quantified in our data have known associations with the brain metastatic microenvironment, including roles of IL-8 and CXCR4 on maintaining or disrupting the permeability of the blood-brain barrier [ 127 ]. IL-6 is secreted by astrocytes and stimulates metastatic colonization [ 128 ]. Other immune-related proteins which have been described in brain pathologies but have unknown roles in brain metastasis formation include CCR3 [ 128 ], IL-1 [ 129 ], and fMLP [ 130 ]. Proteins involved in hormone-mediated signaling were also elevated in the young metastatic microenvironment relative to older mice ( Fig. 5D ). Steroid hormones access the brain and provide signals from the rest of the body. In a TNBC model, estrogen exposure induced activation of ER+ astrocytes and their production of tumor-stimulatory factors [ 48 , 131 ]. Traumatic brain injury led to expression of androgen receptors and microglial activation [ 132 ]. Pathways affecting neuronal function were significantly elevated in the young metastatic microenvironment, including synaptogenesis, ephrin receptor, and NGF signaling, suggesting that cancer cells may influence or hijack neighboring neurons to provide a niche supportive of brain metastases ( Fig. 5E ). In contrast, pathways preferentially activated in the older metastatic microenvironment included many known to be anti-proliferative, or disease or cell death related ( Fig. 5F ). IL-7 signaling was elevated in the old metastatic microenvironment and is a mediator of neuronal death [ 133 ]. IPA-predicted diseases and biofunctions revealed enrichment of viability, invasion, angiogenesis, homeostasis, neuronal development, engulfment of cells, intracellular transport and lipid metabolism in the young microenvironment ( Fig. 6A ). Enrichment of biofunctions associated with learning and cognition suggests that neurocognition was improved in the young microenvironment. Comparatively, biofunctions enriched in the older brain metastatic microenvironment are related to death, neurological disorders, ataxia, apoptosis, neurodegeneration, atrophy of organ, paralysis, metabolism disorder and weakness ( Fig. 6B ). In summary, our pathway analysis using IPA revealed that the major up-regulated signaling pathways in young mouse brain metastatic microenvironment include myriad physiological and pathological processes, such as biosynthetic pathways, intracellular signaling pathway important in regulating metabolism, cell survival, proliferation, and inflammation. These findings underscore the significance of microenvironmental factors in contributing to pathogenesis and the development of brain metastases. TNC is elevated in all young compartments and affects tumor cell migration TNC was significantly enriched in tissue collections from the young metastases (limma p 0.05), the young uninvolved brain (limma p 0.001), and in the young metastatic microenvironment (limma adj. p 0.05). TNC is an extracellular oligomeric matrix glycoprotein which is minimally expressed in normal adult tissues [ 88 ]. Dysregulated TNC expression is associated with breast cancer and CNS diseases, including Alzheimer’s disease and stroke [ 134 ]. TNC binds cell surface receptors, other matrix proteins, and cytokines to exert pleiotropic effects. TNC stimulates tumor invasion and migration, while in CNS diseases it participates in blood-brain barrier compromise, neuronal apoptosis, and ischemia [ 135 ], though its production and/or activity from metastatic microenvironmental cells has not been previously described. Brains from healthy nude mice, 2 and 13 months of age, were lysed to examine TNC abundance by western blot. Demonstrable TNC bands were detected in 5/5 and 2/4 of the young and old brain lysates, respectively ( Fig. 7A , Supplemental Fig. 3A ). In nude mice with MDA-MB-231-BR brain metastases, 6 or 18 months of age, the TNC band was visible in 4/5 and 0/4 mice, respectively ( Fig. 7B , Supplemental Fig. 3B ). These data suggest that TNC is likely produced by normal endothelial cells, astrocytes, and/or pericytes in the brain ( Supplemental Fig. 4A ). Tumor cells migrate along the basement membrane of blood-tumor barrier capillaries, so cancer cell migration and TNC function were measured using scratch assays ( Fig. 7C – H ). MDA-MB-231-BR cells migrated on TNC slightly faster than a control scratch, but without statistical significance after wounding for 24 or 48 h ( Fig. 7C – E ). To better model migration on a basement membranes, type IV collagen coated plates were also used [ 136 , 137 ]. Scratch wound healing was significantly improved with the addition of type IV collagen Combinatorial treatment with both collagen IV and TNC showed additive migration at both timepoints. Similar trends were observed using a second brain-tropic breast cancer cell line, 4T1-BR5 ( Fig. 7F – H ). TNC did not show an additive effect with collagen IV in proliferation assays ( Supplemental Fig. 4B – E ). TNC had no effect on cellular motility as suggested by Boyden chamber motility assay ( Supplemental Fig. 4F ). Secretion of TNC by tumor cells and its functional impact on cell migration was examined using shRNA knockdown of TNC in the MDA-MB-231-BR and 4T1-BR5 cell lines. Western blot demonstrated that two of the three shRNA constructs reduced TNC expression relative to a scrambled shRNA control ( Fig. 8A – B ). The shTNC785, 788, 9824 and shTNC3073 constructs were selected for functional inhibition of TNC prior to a wound healing assay. Wound closure was significantly reduced by shRNA to TNC (MDA-MB-231-BR, Fig. 8C – E ; 4T1-BR5, Fig. 8F – H ) without affecting the cellular proliferation ( Supplemental Fig. 4G – J ). Taken together, these data demonstrate that TNC expression in the young metastatic microenvironment and by the tumor cells stimulates tumor migration both alone and/or through interaction with type IV collagen. Discussion Nearly 35% of patients with metastatic TNBC or HER2+ breast cancers have brain metastases, sometimes as a sole site of progression in otherwise healthy individuals, which cause significant morbidity and mortality [ 138 ]. Patients who are diagnosed with breast cancer at a young age have a more aggressive disease course, a phenomenon repeatedly confirmed in epidemiological studies but poorly understood biologically. Brain metastases preferentially develop in younger patients [ 41 – 47 ] and in younger mice [ 21 ]. To characterize host and disease factors potentially contributing to the age-dependent rates of brain metastasis formation, we employed a hematogenous mouse model of TNBC using young and old hosts. Cellular subpopulations of metastases, tumor-adjacent metastatic microenvironment, and uninvolved brain were harvested by LMD for quantitative proteomic analysis. We acknowledge that the use of human tumor cells in nude mice represents a limitation as adaptive immune contributions are not measured. The most comprehensive list of protein alterations was found in the metastatic microenvironment, where tumor cells interact with an inflamed brain. This area is thought to be critical for tumor cell invasion and subsequent development of additional metastatic foci. Alterations in the metastatic microenvironment were infrequently associated with normal brain aging, as only 103 of the 996 differentially expressed proteins identified in metastatic microenvironment were similarly altered by age in the uninvolved brain. Pathway analysis of the young brain metastatic microenvironment revealed significant enrichment of kinase-mediated signaling pathways, metabolic changes, inflammation, and neuronal signaling. Several of these alterations have been described in brain metastases only relating to observations made in tumor cells, while others contribute to CNS-related pathologies beyond cancer. Age-dependent expression of TNC was validated using lysates of whole brains (healthy and metastasis-bearing) from old and young mice. TNC abundance was significantly elevated in all brain compartments in young mice, which we further demonstrated promotes brain-tropic tumor cell migration independently and through interaction with collagen IV. More recently, Weeraratna and colleagues performed proteomic analysis on conditioned medium derived from human lung fibroblasts from healthy young and aged individuals[ 139 ]. Their findings revealed that age-induced reprogramming of these fibroblasts created a permissive environment, promoting the efficient growth and proliferation of dormant metastatic melanoma cells within the lungs. Although the culprit microenvironmental proteins identified are different, these findings collectively highlight the importance of microenvironmental factors that contribute to the formation of overt metastases from disseminated cancer cells. Changes occurring solely in the microenvironment are difficult to confirm using standard methods such as western blots or immunofluorescence due to dilution by larger tumor masses and uninvolved brain, and the lack of sensitivity to detect small changes. Likely, the impact of any single differentially expressed protein may be minimal. We hypothesize that relatively small alterations in multiple components of a particular pathway may confer a substantial effect on overall pathway activity, and that this may be a better reflection of the proteomic trends observed. These data point to a future study of the brain metastatic microenvironment as a focal point for delineation of pathways promoting brain metastases using pathway inhibitors in young and old mice, for instance Supplementary Material Supplementary file1 Supplementary file2