Introduction Most cancer research to date has been conducted with patients with European ancestry [ 1 ], leading to deficits in our knowledge about cancer in populations with other ancestries [ 2 , 24 ] that contribute to inequities in quality of care and treatment outcomes in patients of non-European ancestry [ 8 , 10 ]. Recent work shows the genomics and morphology of cancer can vary greatly between patients of European, African and Asian ancestries [ 14 , 20 , 21 ]. This impacts efforts to personalize patient treatments based on specific clinical and molecular tumour features [ 9 ]. If precision oncology reflects existing biases towards patients of European ancestry [ 2 , 21 ], they will only sustain existing inequities in cancer care [ 4 ]. Personalized approaches based on patient genomics have been incorporated clinically to assess individual risk of breast cancer [ 35 ]. Identification of putative inherited risk variants via germline DNA sequencing enables women and their families to implement individualized risk-reduction strategies [ 31 ]. However, the comparative analyses of public data on rare variants with potential to increase breast cancer risk across populations of different ancestry are lacking. ClinVar [ 19 ] aggregates expert report evaluating links between genetic variants and human disease, including breast cancer, and is the most comprehensive and prominent database of its type. We reasoned gaps in knowledge about risk factors for breast cancer in non-European populations would result in them having proportionally fewer reports in ClinVar on the pathogenicity of variants in breast cancer associated genes. Our study focused on nine genes ( ATM, BRCA1, BRCA2, CHEK2, PALB2, RAD51C, RAD51D, TP53 ) where the Breast Cancer Association Consortium (BCAC) found inherited protein-truncating variants to be associated with elevated risk of developing breast cancer [ 5 ]. Protein-coding single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), insertions and deletions (indels) from the nine BCAC genes for private variants unique to one of the five populations were extracted from the Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD) [ 17 ]: Non-Finnish European (NFE), African (AFR), Admixed American (AMR), East Asian (EAS) and South Asian (SAS). The proportion of such population private variants reported in ClinVar for each gene and population were used to compare the extent of publicly available data on putative breast cancer risk variants by ancestry. Our study revealed proportionally fewer expert reports of putative breast cancer risk variants from the SAS population are available in ClinVar for 7/9 genes. In contrast, ClinVar reporting rates for private variants from AFR, AMR and EAS were largely comparable with NFE across all genes, with few exceptions. The existence of such knowledge deficits advocate for more extensive assessment and reporting of putative breast cancer risk variants from individuals of South Asian ancestry. Methods Extraction and filtering of data from gnomAD Variant data of all genes were downloaded from gnomAD v4.0.0 on March 12, 2024. Filtering and visualization of data were performed with the tidyverse v2.0.0 package as implemented for R software version 4.3.3. was applied toFilters were applied using tidyverse functions to identify variants present exclusively within (i.e., private to) the Non-Finnish European (NFE), African American (AFR), Admixed American (AMR), East Asian (EAS), and South Asian (SAS) populations. Private variants were identified as those having an allele count = 1 in a population and allele count = 0 in every other population included in gnomAD v4. Population ancestry was assigned by the gnomAD consortium based on ancestry informative markers [ 17 ]. Data were downloaded (Sept 4, 2023) and filtered in the same manner from gnomAD v2.1.0. ClinVar status as listed in gnomAD v4.0.0 were simplified into four groups: Pathogenic, Benign, Uncertain, or Unreported. The Pathogenic category included variants labeled as Pathogenic, Likely Pathogenic, or Pathogenic/Likely Pathogenic, with a similar approach applied to the Benign variants. Annotations were assigned by gnomAD consortium, based on Variant Effect Predictor v105 using GENCODE v39 on GRCh38, with the LOFTEE (Loss-Of-Function Transcript Effect Estimator) plugin [ 17 ]. Comparison of private variants between gnomAD populations To correct for differences in the overall numbers of sequenced individuals and private variants per population, the proportion of variants in Unreported group was calculated for each population. The proportion of Unreported variants in each gene from AFR, AMR, EAS and SAS was compared separately against the largest population, NFE, by Fisher’s Exact Test as implemented in the fisher.test() function of R v4.3.3 (Supplementary Materials S1 ). To correct for multiple-hypothesis testing a Bonferroni corrected significance threshold was calculated as 0.00125 = 0.05/40 (4 tests each for 9 genes plus 4 tests of total proportion across all genes). Total abundance of private variants was normalized per 10,000 individuals. LiftOver process Conversion of chromosomal positions of population-private variants from gnomAD v4.0.0, based on coordinates from Genome Reference Consortium Human Build 38 (GRCh38 or hg38), to genome positions for gnomAD v2.1.0, based on coordinates from Genome Reference Consortium Human Build 37 (GRCh37 or hg19), was performed using chain file "hg38ToHg19.over.chain.gz" downloaded from https://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg38/liftOver/ . Coordinate conversion was implemented using the rtracklayer v1.64.0 and GenomicRanges v1.56.0 packages in RStudio. Retrieval and mapping of variants to other databases The oncogenic status of Unreported population private variants from gnomAD v4.0.0 was obtained from the OncoKB database on April 16 2024 after conversion to hg19 positions for cross-referencing. The FLOSSIES database was searched on April 30, 2024 for presence of variants from gnomAD v4.0.0 with Unreported status in ClinVar. Prediction and scoring of population private variants using dbNSFP Population-private variants underwent comprehensive predictive analysis and scoring using algorithms embedded within the dbNSFP v4.7a database, accessed June 5, 2024. Specifically, predictions from AlphaMissense, FATHMM, MetaLR, MetaSVM, MutationAssessor, Polyphen HDIV, and SIFT, along with rankscores from AlphaMissense, CADD raw, CADD hg19, FATHMM, GERP++, MetaLR, MetaSVM, MutationAssessor, Polyphen HDIV, Polyphen HVAR, REVEL, SIFT, and VEST4 were included for the analysis of variants using dbNSFP. The number of rankscores available in dbNSFP for the selected algorithms varied between genes and variants. Principal component analysis Principal component analysis (PCA) as implemented in the prcomp() function of R v4.3.3 was used to cluster variants based on rankscores. Principal components (PCs) were calculated for each variant based on 24 rankscores shared between all genes [Table S1]. PC1 and PC2 were plotted to assess similarity in pathogenicity scores between variants. PC values were visualized with marginal boxplots of the distribution of each ClinVar clinical status, added using ggExtra. Only rankscores distributed between 0–1 were included in the PCA, to remove confounding effects of differences in range of absolute values reported by different algorithms. Code availability Code and intermediate data files used in these analyses are available as Git repo https://github.com/RaveenRony/ClinVar-annotation-rates . Results Identification and characterization of putative population-specific breast cancer risk variants To compare putative breast cancer risk variants between populations, we analyzed insertion/deletion (indel) and single nucleotide variants (SNVs) from 9 genes reported as enriched for protein-truncating variants in breast cancer patients by the Breast Cancer Association Consortium (BCAC) in 2021: ATM , BRCA1 , BRCA2 , CHEK2 , PALB2, BARD1, RAD51C, RAD51D , and TP53. BCAC additionally reported five of these genes ( ATM , BRCA1 , BRCA2 , CHEK2 and TP53) to be enriched for rare missense variants as well [ 5 ]. Data on variants predicted to alter protein coding sequence (frameshift indels, inframe indels, missense, splice site, stop gain or lost and start lost) were downloaded from gnomAD v4.0 (Methods) for each of the 9 risk genes identified by BCAC [Fig. 1 A]. Data were filtered to retain only variants private—i.e., found exclusively in just one population—Non-Finnish European (NFE), African American (AFR), Admixed American (AMR), East Asian (EAS) or South Asian (SAS). The intent was to enrich for variants more likely to be ancestry-specific and thus better reflect factors influencing variant annotation for each selected population. These five populations cover diverse ancestries represented by 22,000 individuals each in gnomAD v4.0 [Table S2]. Fig. 1 Features of protein-coding variants in breast cancer risk genes that are private to distinct populations in gnomAD. A Study overview. Protein coding variants from nine genes identified by the Breast Cancer Association Consortium were selected from gnomAD for inclusion in the analysis if they were private to one of the populations shown and their ClinVar status as annotated in gnomAD was recorded. B Total numbers of protein-coding variants from gnomADv4 private to each population, per gene. NFE—Non-Finnish European, AFR—African American, AMR—Admixed American, EAS—East Asian and SAS—South Asian. C Percentages of population private variants within each ClinVar annotation category, per gene. The height of each segment indicating its percentage relative to the total number of variants for the corresponding gene. D Percentages of population private variants with Unreported status by Ensemble VEP annotation across each gene. The height of each segment represents the percentage of the variant type within Unreported variants for the respective gene. E Frequency ranges of population private protein-coding variants included in the analysis. Each bar displays the percentage of variants with the indicated number of alternate alleles (0–1, 2–3, 4–10, 11–100, 100 +) in gnomAD v4 in each gene for each ClinVar annotation category. F Percentages of population private variants within each ClinVar annotation category, per population. The height of each segment indicating its percentage relative to the total number of variants for the corresponding population We used population assignments made by the gnomAD consortium based on principal component analysis of ancestry-informative markers [ 17 ]. The number of private, protein-coding variants per population ranged from 773 (AMR) to 8011 (NFE) [Fig. 1 B]. Given NFE individuals make up 77% of samples in gnomAD, we expect increased power to detect rare private variants in that population. The per-capita number of private variants is actually lower in NFE than non-European populations, which may reflect diminishing returns in detection of novel variants with increased cohort size, among other factors [Table S2]. The observation that protein-coding variants in breast cancer risk genes from non-European populations are more likely to be private motivated us to investigate availability of clinical annotations for such variants. All populations have a minimum of 23 protein-coding variants in the genes of interest. BRCA2 and ATM had the most private protein-coding variants, with 3497 and 3063, respectively, while TP53 , RAD51C and RAD51D had the fewest (431, 462 and 492). [Table S3]. This discordance likely reflects the longer protein-coding sequence lengths of the BRCA2 and ATM transcripts relative to the other genes, as normalization for transcript length revealed comparable densities of private coding variants between genes [Table S4A]. We next considered the ClinVar annotation status as given in gnomAD for each variant in our filtered data set. Variants listed as ‘Unreported’ represent potential breast cancer risk SNVs and indels that did not have assessments of pathogenicity in ClinVar at the time data were gathered for this study (March 2024). To control for differences in the absolute numbers of private variants between populations, we compared the proportions of private variants with Unreported status in ClinVar to assess of how rates of reporting of expert clinical curations vary across genes and populations. Of the 12,520 variants included in our analysis, 3804 had ClinVar status of Unreported (30.4%), with BRCA2 having the lowest rate of Unreported variants (27.3%) and RAD51D the highest rate (47.4%) [Table S4B, Fig. 1 C]. Overall, the majority (81.2%) of all Unreported variants were annotated as missense variants [Table S5], ranging from 73.0% of private variants being missense in CHEK2 to 87.0% in BRCA2, with a mean per-gene percentage of 82.5% [Fig. 1 D; Table S6B]. However, altogether 665 frameshift, splice site, start lost, stop gained and inframe deletion variants were Unreported across all genes, suggesting a substantial number of potentially pathogenic breast cancer risk variants are currently absent from ClinVar. Unreported variants were more likely to be singletons, with an allele count of 1 in gnomAD v4, than variants that were reported in ClinVar [Fig. 1 E]. While 80% of Unreported variants were singletons, this proportion was 70% for Benign, Pathogenic or Uncertain variants [Table S7], save for three exceptions. First, Pathogenic variants from TP53, where 74.5% were singletons. However, TP53 is a gene where germline coding variants are known to be under very strong negative selection [ 18 ]. The other two exceptions are Benign variants in CHEK2 and PALB2 being 100% and 80% singletons, respectively [Table S7], although Benign variants are rare in these genes: only 2 for CHEK2 and 10 for PALB2 [Table S4A]. Overall, substantial numbers of variants predicted to alter the protein coding sequence of breast cancer risk genes private to single populations but of undetermined clinical significance exist in gnomAD v4. Most were rare missense variants, although high-impact mutations such as frameshift, stop gained and splice site alterations accounted for 17.5% of Unreported variants [Table S6B]. Notably 30% of private variants were not reported in ClinVar, representing potential missing information about the landscape of breast cancer risk across populations of diverse ancestry [Fig. 1 F]. Putative breast cancer risk variants from South Asian populations are less likely to be reported in ClinVar than variants from other populations We assessed the impact of population ancestry on depth and availability of data for putative breast cancer risk variants in ClinVar by comparing the rates at which private, protein coding variants from gnomAD v4 across the five populations of interest were reported in ClinVar. The overall percentage of Unreported variants among all population-private variants in our data set was 30.4% [Table S3C], but reporting rates of variants in ClinVar for each population varied. AMR had the lowest rate of Unreported variants (19.1%), followed by AFR (21.0%), NFE (30.0%), and EAS (30.9%), while SAS had the highest rate (43.4%) [Table S3C, Fig. 1 F]. The SAS population had the lowest or among the lowest reporting rates for all 9 genes assessed [Fig. 2 A]. The percentage of gnomAD variants in ClinVar was 5.3% to 19.0% lower for SAS than for NFE across all genes [Table S3C]. Accounting for total numbers of observed variants from gnomAD, the difference was nominally significant (unadjusted Fisher Exact p-value 0.05) in 7 of the 9 genes, and exceeded the Bonferroni multiple hypothesis testing threshold (p 0.0014) in 3 genes ( PALB2 , ATM , BRCA2 ) [Table S5]. The power of per-gene testing was constrained by sample size, but results were highly significant (Fisher Exact p-value 2.2e-16) when variants were combined across all genes [Table S8]. Variants from the gnomAD SAS population are thus consistently under-represented in ClinVar across established and putative breast cancer risk genes. RAD51C and RAD51D were the only genes with an unadjusted p 0.05 [Table S8]. They had lower counts of private protein-coding variants in GnomAD v4 than 6/7 of the other genes [Table S3A], reducing power to detect differences between populations. It is also worth noting RAD51C/D have lowest ClinVar reporting rates for NFE [Table S3CA], perhaps due to being less frequently mutated and having more variable penetrance than other BC risk genes [ 22 , 36 ], as well as being more strongly associated with the rarer ER negative and triple negative breast cancer subtypes [ 13 , 29 ]. Fig. 2 ClinVar reporting rates for protein-coding variants in breast cancer risk genes that are private to distinct populations in gnomAD. A The percentage of variants private to each indicated gnomAD population that are reported in ClinVar, for each gene. Data from gnomAD v4 (Blue line) are overlaid onto data from gnomAD v2 (Red line). B Percentage of private frameshift, stop gained and splice site variants from each gnomAD population that are reported in ClinVar, for each gene. In both plots, populations with significant differences in ClinVar reporting rates compared to the Non-Finnish European (NFE) population are marked with an asterix (*) were Bonferroni-adjusted Fisher Exact test p -value 0.05 and with a dot (○) where nominal unadjusted Fisher Exact p -value 0.05 Notably, ClinVar reporting rates for private, protein coding variants from gnomAD were typically comparable between NFE, AFR, AMR and EAS [Fig. 2 A]. In fact, reporting rates were higher in AFR and AMR than in NFE for 8/9 genes, with unadjusted Fisher Exact p -value 0.05 in 4 genes for AFR versus NFE, and in 3 genes for AMR versus NFE [Table S8]. Beyond the data from SAS, reporting rates substantially lower than those of NFE were only observed for EAS in RAD51D (36.8% vs 53.3%) and TP53 (34.8% vs 71.3%). Thus, in our analysis under-reporting of private, protein coding variants in breast cancer risk genes in ClinVar was much more prevalent in the population of South Asian ancestry. The majority of variants private to a single population are singletons, with the alternate allele reported in just one individual in GnomAD v4 [Table S7]. We repeated the analysis restricting data to very rare private variants, defined as having 2–5 alternate alleles, aggregating across all genes to compensate for low per-gene counts. This subset displayed similar results to whole set of private variants, including predominance of variants from NFE but a significantly higher proportion of total variants with Unreported status in SAS compared to NFE when data combined for all genes (32.4% vs 10.9%; one-sided Fisher Exact p = 9.13e-9) [Figure S1; Table S9C]. As reported, the gnomAD v4 release had an eightfold increase in the NFE population from gnomAD v2, from 77,165 in to 622,057, and a threefold increase in the SAS population, from 15,308 to 45,546. Adding more individuals would be expected to increase the numbers of population-private variants in gnomAD v4, perhaps without sufficient time to have elapsed for them to be expertly curated and deposited into ClinVar. To assess the extent to which the expansion of gnomAD may contribute to differences in ClinVar reporting rates between NFE, SAS and the other populations studied here, we repeated our analyses using data from gnomAD v2 [Methods]. While ClinVar reporting rates are lower for gnomAD v4 than gnomAD v2 in nearly every population and gene assessed, the relative differences between populations remained largely concordant, as indicated by the similar shapes to the curves in Fig. 2 A. The proportion of private, protein-coding variants reported in ClinVar was again consistently significantly lower across genes in SAS relative to NFE (unadjusted Fisher Exact p-value 0.05 for 7/9 genes) [Table S10]. Reduced ClinVar reporting rates for putative breast cancer risk variants in the SAS population was therefore a trend also present in gnomAD v2. The majority of Unreported variants across all genes and populations (82.5%) are annotated as causing non-synonymous (missense) changes [Table S6B]. However, variants that truncate proteins of alter exon structure are likely to be more amenable for inclusion in ClinVar, given their more profound and readily interpretable effects on protein function. To assess how possible biases toward reporting more impactful variants in ClinVar may influence our findings, we compared combined reporting rates for frameshift, stop gained, splice site and inframe deletion variants from gnomAD v4 between populations. ClinVar reporting rates were lower in SAS than NFE and other populations for 6 of the 9 genes investigated [Fig. 2 B]. The comparison between SAS and NFE attained a nominal Fisher Exact p-value 0.05 for ATM , BRCA2 , CHEK2 and TP53 [Table S11]. As expected, ClinVar reporting rates for missense variants was significantly lower for SAS across all genes [Figure S2]. These data show under-reporting of putative risk variants from the SAS population occurs for multiple types of protein-altering variants. Further, we see little difference in the proportion of variants in ClinVar that are labelled Pathogenic for each population [Table S3D; Table S3E]. If anything, SAS variants are slightly more likely to be labelled Pathogenic in ClinVar than for the other populations (unadjusted Fisher Exact p-value = 0.04; Odds Ratio = 1.2) [Table S11]. Thus, perceptions that variants from SAS populations are less likely to be pathogenic and therefore less worthy of submission to ClinVar are unlikely to explain the under-reporting of putative breast cancer risk variants from SAS individuals. ClinVar is considered diverse and comprehensive, but may still lack variants found in other databases. However, only 12 of the Unreported population private gnomAD in our study could be found in an independent database of annotated variants from cancer risk genes, FLOSSIES [ 33 ] [Table S12]. The majority were from the NFE and AFR populations, with just 2 from SAS. Overall reporting rates of gnomAD variants in for FLOSSIES were quite low, in keeping with its smaller size. However, reporting rates were still higher for NFE and AFR than for SAS, EAS and AMR across all genes [Figure S3A]. This does reflect the composition of FLOSSIES but also demonstrates how variants from SAS and other non-European populations may be under-represented in variant annotation databases generally. To investigate whether Unreported germline variants may have been identified and characterized in tumors, we searched for them in OncoKB, which curates functional evidence for pathogenicity of recorded somatic mutations [ 6 ]. Generally, 20% of variants that were Unreported in ClinVar had pathogenicity assessments in OncoKB, across each gene and each population [Figure S4]. This was especially pronounced for missense variants, where 10% were assessed by OncoKB [Figure S4]. The exception was TP53 where every population except AMR had reporting rates of above 25% for all populations, even for missense variants. However, functional information is still unavailable for the majority of population-private Unreported variants identified in our study. Computational analysis of pathogenicity assessment reveals unreported missense variants with potential impacts on breast cancer risk Unreported variants not reported in ClinVar contribute to structural inequity in genomic resources because they represent potentially clinically significant variants that have not yet been discovered. The 14.3% of Unreported variants causing protein-truncating, frameshift or canonical splice site alterations have clear links to pathogenicity. However, it is the 82.5% of Unreported variants that are missense that will require closer inspection to close knowledge gaps for SAS and other non-European populations [Fig. 1 D; Table S6B]. To evaluate the extent to which Unreported missense variants may contribute to breast cancer risk, we compared pathogenicity predictions from dbNSFP [ 23 ] for all population-private Unreported missense variants versus the other ClinVar annotations in our 9 genes of interest [Methods]. Rank scores scaling pathogenicity predictions from 0 to 1 were utilized, to allow direct and meaningful comparison across algorithms and ClinVar annotation categories. As illustrated by rank scores based on the Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion (CADD) algorithm [ 28 ], variants annotated as Pathogenic in ClinVar tend to have rank scores at or close to 1, while variants annotated as Benign have much lower rank scores, close to 0 [Fig. 3 A]. Rank scores for variants categorized as having Uncertain pathogenicity in ClinVar were distributed broadly from 0 to 1, consistent with a range of possible effects for variants with this designation. Variants in the Unreported category showed a similar range of CADD rank scores as Uncertain variants, indicating while many may be benign, a subset are likely to impact protein function. Similar patterns were observed for rank scores derived from AlphaFold predictions [ 16 ] from missense variants [Fig. 3 B], as well as other algorithms included in dbNSFP [Figure S5]. Fig. 3 In silico prediction of pathogenicity for non-synonymous variants in breast cancer risk genes that are private to distinct populations in gnomAD. A Distribution of raw CADD rankscores from dbNSFP for gnomAD variants private to NFE, AFR, AMR, EAS or SAS, divided by gene and ClinVar annotation category. The widths of the violins represent the density of variants, with the individual points mark median CADD rankscore. Results shown are for private variants from all populations combined. B Distribution of AlphaMissense rankscores from dbNSFP for gnomAD variants private to NFE, AFR, AMR, EAS or SAS, divided by gene and ClinVar annotation category. The widths of the violin represent the density of variants, points mark median AlphaMissense rankscores. Results shown are for private variants from all populations combined. C The number of pathogenicity prediction algorithms predicting likely pathogenicity for gnomAD variants private to NFE, AFR, AMR, EAS or SAS. Each bar represents the percentage of variants listed as Pathogenic (red), Benign (blue), Uncertain significance (green) or Unreported (grey) by ClinVar with predictions of pathogenicity from 0 to 7 algorithms, in each gene. Results shown are for private variants from all populations combined. D Clustering by principal component analysis (PCA) of gnomAD variants private to NFE, AFR, AMR, EAS or SAS across the nine genes, colour-coded by ClinVar annotations. PCA was conducted based on rankscores from 24 protein pathogenicity prediction algorithms provided by dbNSFP. Each point represents individual variants, coloured by their respective ClinVar annotation category. The results shown are for variants from all populations and all genes combined. Marginal boxplots display the distributions of the first two principal components for variants in each ClinVar annotation category We assessed consistency in predictions of variant impacts by aggregating data from six algorithms in dbNSFP plus AlphaMissense [ 7 ] that provide an assessment of whether each population private missense variant was either damaging/deleterious or tolerated/benign (PolyPhen, SIFT, Mutation Assessor, FATHMM, MetaSVM, MetaLR and AlphaMissense), from variants for which predictions from at least 4 of these algorithms were available [Methods]. None or only 1 of the algorithms predicted variants labelled Benign in ClinVar to be damaging, with multiple exceptions seen in BRCA1 and TP53 [Fig. 3 C]. Conversely, a high percentage (78.95%) of variants labelled Pathogenic in ClinVar were predicted to be damaging by a majority of (4/7) algorithms, in line with expectations. Once again Uncertain and Unreported variants showed a range of results in the number of algorithms that predicted damaging effects [Fig. 3 C]. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) clustered and visualised differences between 9,827 private missense variants across all genes in rankscores from 24 pathogenicity prediction algorithms [Table S1; Methods]. PCA results cluster according to ClinVar annotation class [Fig. 3 D]. Principal components (PCs) were well separated for Benign and Pathogenic variants but Uncertain and Unreported variants showed a wide and overlapping range of values across the first two principal components The overlap in PC1 and PC2 between the Uncertain and Unreported classes was still high when PCA was performed on private variants from each population separately [Figure S6]. Collectively, predictions of variant pathogenicity indicate there are many missense variants in breast cancer genes capable of deleterious effects to protein function not yet reported in ClinVar. This disproportionately impacts the SAS population given its higher percentage of Unreported variants across breast cancer risk genes. Discussion The depth of knowledge of cancer genomics varies between populations according to genetic ancestry. This study investigated how this affects current data on genetic risk factors for breast cancer in people of European, African, American, East Asian and South Asian ancestry. Proportions of private variants reported in ClinVar in 9 recognized breast cancer risk genes were similar between NFE, AMR, AFR and EAS populations in gnomAD. Variants in breast cancer genes from these populations may be reported to ClinVar at comparable rates, acknowledging the over-representation of NFE in genomic data. Where differences were found, AMR, AFR and/or EAS often had higher proportions of private variants in ClinVar, likely related to the broader sampling of NFE resulting in larger numbers of private variants. In contrast, lower percentages of protein-altering variants private to the SAS population were reported in ClinVar than NFE and other populations for all genes examined here. This represents a deficit in available knowledge of genetic risk factors for breast cancer in South Asians. The differences were statistically significant across a majority of genes and observed across variant types and in the FLOSSIES database too. Practical and cultural barriers to genetic screening and cancer treatment in South Asian communities may account for lower reporting rates for SAS variants in ClinVar [ 3 , 12 ] in addition to limited information exchange between data repositories from different parts of the world [ 27 , 34 ]. Although lifetime risk of cancer is thought to be lower in South Asians [ 11 , 32 ], as one of the world’s largest ancestry groups, their overall burden of cancer is substantial [ 15 , 26 ] and increasing due to lifestyle changes [ 25 ]. Many Unreported variants could be labelled variants of uncertain significance (VUS) by current American College of Medical Genetics criteria [ 9 , 35 ], perhaps reducing likelihood of reporting. However, our analyses reveal 9.2% of Unreported variants cause frameshift mutations [Table S6B], while numerous others show evidence of potential functional effects (Figs. 1 , 3 ). Such data warrant efforts to facilitate expert evaluation and reporting of putative pathogenic variants from South Asians and others with ancestry outside Europe. Our study is limited by the extent and quality of available data in gnomAD and ClinVar. Despite being the largest and most comprehensive public repositories of their kind at the time of writing, they are still only representative of a subset of existing human genetic variation. Under sampling of certain populations may mean a subset of variants we deemed to be private to a single population are actually shared across populations. Further, many private variants are singletons, which occasionally may represent sequencing errors rather than genuine SNVs or indels. A relative lack of sites with two or more observed alternate alleles is a major limitation that creates biases against populations traditionally underrepresented in sequencing studies. Despite its size, gnomAD still lacks power to detect differences in ClinVar reporting rates between NFE and other populations that are robust enough survive multiple hypothesis testing correction for many genes. These points caution against over-interpretation of results reported here. Still, the consistent deficits of reporting of putative SAS breast cancer variants in ClinVar we see across multiple genes calls for deeper study of the genetics of cancer in this ancestry group and efforts to identify knowledge gaps between ancestries in other areas of cancer genomics. Overall, South Asians remain poorly represented in cancer genomics research [ 26 , 30 ] and our results indicate one of the potential consequences of this shortfall. It is widely known historical biases have left substantial gaps in our knowledge of cancer in populations with non-European ancestry. However, ways to identify and characterize such gaps are lacking. Our framework therefore creates an important methodological advance that brings to light shortfalls in publicly accessible data on breast cancer risk variants from South Asian populations. Whether similar deficits in knowledge of risk variants for other human diseases exist for South Asian populations warrants further consideration. Supplementary Information Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material. Supplementary Material 1 Supplementary Material 2 Supplementary Material 2