INTRODUCTION Sexual minority populations—encompassing individuals identifying as lesbian, gay, bisexual, queer, and those with same-sex partners or attractions—experience more adverse health outcomes relative to their heterosexual peers. 1 – 6 Minority stress theory has been the foundational framework that explains the observed disparities, and it posits that challenging social experiences (e.g., stigma, discrimination) are chronic stressors that lead to adverse health outcomes. 7 – 9 In the context of cancer, this theory explains the elevated prevalence of cancer risk factors (e.g., smoking, alcohol use) 10 – 16 and lower rates of cancer screening (e.g., Pap tests) among sexual minority groups because of stress and medical mistrust in response to pervasive stigma and discrimination. 3 , 17 – 21 Additionally, emerging evidence shows chronic stress and discrimination-related stress to be associated with higher rates of cancer risk, independent of other risk factors. 22 – 24 However, accurate estimates of cancer incidence among sexual minority populations remain unknown as sexual orientation and gender identity (SOGI) data are not systematically collected, making evidence of SOGI-related cancer disparities limited. 25 , 26 Given data limitations within the United States, earlier work from scholars have used indirect methods to estimate sexual orientation (SO)–related cancer disparities. Austin et al. applied risk-prediction models to estimate cancer risks and found no SO-related differences in predicted colon cancer incidence but higher predicted incidence of breast cancer among lesbian and bisexual women when compared to heterosexual women. 27 , 28 Using a different approach, Boehmer et al. linked Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program data to census data and found higher incidences of breast and colorectal cancer in areas with higher density of sexual minority women. 29 , 30 Similarly, in a separate study, Boehmer et al. compared California’s population density data to cancer incidence data from the registry and found a higher incidence of breast cancer and a lower incidence of colorectal and lung cancer in areas with a greater density of lesbian women. 31 Growing evidence of SO-related cancer disparities from population-based surveys have also emerged. Gonzales and Zinone found bisexual women had higher overall cancer risks than heterosexual women, but site-specific cancer analyses were not possible. 32 Singer et al. reported lower odds of lifetime prevalence of skin cancer among bisexual women when compared to their heterosexual peers. 33 Another study by Boehmer et al. found higher cancer prevalence among gay men when compared to heterosexual men, but found no differences in cancer prevalence by SO in women. 34 Outside the United States, Saunders et al. found no overall cancer prevalence differences by SO, except for human papilloma virus and HIV-associated cancers. 35 Underwood et al. leveraged longitudinal data from the U.K. Biobank and found higher lung cancer incidence in bisexual individuals when compared to the heterosexual reference group; these differences appeared to be mediated by smoking. Importantly, SO was categorized based on history of sexual partners in this study and did not include other measures of SO. 36 Although these approaches revealed important findings, this field continues to be hampered by methodological limitations. Indirect estimates—such as those using risk-prediction models or data on sexual minority geographic densities—do not directly capture cancer incidence. Existing cross-sectional data only capture prevalence and not incidence, and studies that do directly estimate incidence often have limited statistical power, which makes it difficult to quantify site-specific estimates. Additionally, previous research has been limited by inadequate SO measurement (e.g., defining orientation solely through behavior vis-à-vis sex of sexual partners as opposed to including attraction and self-identification). To address this gap, we leveraged detailed SO and cancer diagnoses data from the Nurses’ Health Study II (NHSII), a large, longitudinal U.S. cohort to quantify the incidence of any cancer (i.e., all-cancer) among different SO groups as our primary outcome. For secondary outcomes, we assessed incidences of 21 site-specific cancers (e.g., breast, skin, lung) for each SO group. METHODS Study population NHSII is an ongoing, U.S. longitudinal cohort of 116,411 registered female nurses without a history of cancer at the time of enrollment except carcinoma in situ or nonmelanoma skin cancer. Sex assigned at birth and gender identity were not assessed separately; “female nurses” who were eligible for and enrolled in this study are assumed to be individuals who were assigned female at birth, but no data on their current or past gender identity have been collected. Participants were 25 to 42 years of age at baseline in 1989. Follow-up questionnaires are completed biennially, with ~88% cumulative follow up. The study protocol was approved by the institutional review boards of the Brigham and Women’s Hospital and the Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, and those of participating registries as required. Sexual orientation Sexual orientation data were collected in 1995, 2009, and 2017. In 1995 and 2009, participants were asked about their SO with a single measurement of identity; in 2017, a comprehensive SO measurement was used that included questions on lifetime sexual attraction, partners (behavior), and identity. We used 2017 data to categorize participants into SO groups. If a participant’s SO data were missing in 2017, we used 2009 data; if 2009 data were also missing, we used 1995 data. Participants without any SO data from all years were excluded. Information about missingness of SO data can be seen in Appendix 1 . Using these data, we grouped participants into five SO groups: (1) reference group: completely heterosexual (i.e., no same-sex attraction, partner, nor reported other sexual identities in their lifetime; participants who reported a heterosexual identity but were missing data on attractions and partners were also included in this group), (2) heterosexual with past same-sex attraction/behavior/identity, (3) mostly heterosexual, (4) bisexual, and (5) lesbian (combining mostly homosexual and completely homosexual into a single group). These categories were formed based on the minority stress theory. Self-disclosed lesbian, bisexual, and mostly heterosexual women are grouped based on their identified sexuality, acknowledging their well-documented experiences of minority stress. 37 , 38 For individuals who identify as heterosexual, histories of same-sex attraction and behavior were incorporated as identity alone may not capture their minority stress experiences. It is important to note that individuals who identify as heterosexual but disclosed histories of same-sex attraction or behavior experience a different form of minority stress from the rest of the sexual minority subgroups because they may feel dissonance between their sexual identity and other dimensions of SO. 39 Thus, separate categories are warranted for a more granular understanding of the impact of minority stress on cancer outcomes in sexual minority populations. More details of the SO measurement and categorization can be seen in Appendix 2 . Sensitivity analyses We conducted sensitivity analyses using an alternate SO categorization method: participants who reported a heterosexual identity but were missing data on lifetime attraction/behavior/identity were removed from the reference group (group 1a: completely heterosexual group) and analyzed separately as their own group (group 1b: heterosexual with missing data group). This approach reduces potential misclassification bias by ensuring participants who reported a heterosexual identity and denied lifetime same-sex attraction/behavior/identity are the only ones included in the completely heterosexual reference group. However, this approach may induce selection bias by differentially removing participants that attrite from the study before 2017 from the reference group (and hence not able to provide lifetime attraction/behavior/identity data that was only available on the 2017 questionnaire), and incidence rate ratios of sexual minority groups would be higher because of this bias. As such, we have included heterosexual-identifying participants with missing lifetime attraction/behavior/identity data into the reference group as our primary categorization method despite the potential misclassification bias. This may mitigate potential selection bias and provides the most conservative estimates of cancer incidence disparities by SO. More details of this alternate categorization can be seen in Appendix 3 . Cancer Cancer diagnoses were assessed on each wave of the biennial questionnaire and were confirmed by NHSII physician investigators using medical records. We calculated the incidence of first diagnosis of any cancer among each SO group. We also calculated the site-specific cancer incidence of each group at 21 specific cancer sites available in NHSII. For the full list of the cancer sites, see Table 2 . Statistical analyses We compared the crude incidence rates among each of the sexual minority subgroups to the completely heterosexual reference group using age-adjusted incidence rate ratios (aIRR) and their 95% CIs. Before performing any analyses, we assessed the baseline age distribution of each SO subgroup to establish whether age would be a nuisance variable in our analyses. 40 , 41 Age was not standardized to any specific age distribution; instead, we calculated aIRRs by performing stratification and Mantel-Haenszel pooling by 5-year age categories. Person-time was calculated in person-years using participants’ contributed time between baseline in 1989 and 2017 for these analyses. For the primary outcome of any cancer diagnosis, participants stopped contributing person-time at their first confirmed cancer diagnosis, death, or loss to follow up. For site-specific cancers, participants continued to contribute person-time to other site-specific analyses even after being diagnosed with another cancer. We chose not to adjust for other variables because of the specific context of SO as our main interest. Many of the variables that might be considered confounders in the context of cancer research (e.g., smoking, drinking, body mass index, socioeconomic position, health insurance) are mediators between SO and adverse health. 2 , 18 , 21 As a result, adjusting for these variables would bias our estimates. 42 We consider any higher incidence of these risk factors among sexual minority groups to be an important and theoretically meaningful aspect of cancer risk. RESULTS Demographic characteristics of our final analytic sample ( N = 101,543) can be seen in Table 1 . The mean age, distribution of age, and race/ethnicity composition were similar across all SO groups. Attrition was also similar across groups, except in groups with missing data. Cancer incidence at all sites (i.e., all cancer) We found participants in the completely heterosexual reference group to have a crude incidence of 428 cases/100,000 person-years, in comparison to 449 among heterosexual women with past same-sex attractions/partners/identity, 439 among mostly heterosexual women, 351 among bisexual women, and 516 among lesbian women. The aIRRs comparing sexual minority groups to the completely heterosexual reference group were heterosexual women with past same-sex attractions/partners/identity, aIRR, 1.03 (0.95–1.11); mostly heterosexual women, aIRR, 1.03 (0.90–1.17); bisexual women, aIRR, 0.80 (0.58–1.10); and lesbian women, aIRR, 1.17 (0.99–1.38). Cancer incidence at individual cancer sites In site-specific analyses, statistically significant higher incidences of cancer were found in three sites among lesbian women, namely: thyroid cancer (aIRR, 1.87 [1.03–3.41]), basal cell carcinoma (aIRR, 1.85 [1.09–3.14]), and non-Hodgkin lymphoma (aIRR, 2.13 [1.10–4.12]). Heterosexual women with a history of same-sex attraction/behavior/identity had lower incidences of lung cancer (aIRR, 0.37 [0.17–0.84], N = 6). For cancer sites with case numbers ≤5, only case numbers are displayed, and the crude incidence, aIRR, and its CI are not assessed (see Table 2 ). Sensitivity analyses Using alternate SO categorization, differences in cancer incidence for non-Hodgkin lymphoma remain statistically significant among lesbian women (aIRR, 2.43 [1.25–4.73]) when compared to their heterosexual peers, but findings of differences became nonsignificant for thyroid cancer (aIRR, 1.80 [0.99–3.29]) and basal cell carcinoma (aIRR, 1.68 [0.99–2.85]; see Appendix 5 ). With this alternate categorization method, the finding of a higher all-cancer incidence among lesbian women reached statistical significance (aIRR, 1.19 [1.01–1.41]). DISCUSSION Our findings of increased cancer burden among lesbian women using data from a large, longitudinal cohort with comprehensive SO measures provide a unique contribution to our understanding of SO-related cancer disparities. For our all-cancer analyses, lesbian women had an aIRR of 1.17, with the lower limit of the CI falling just below 1, at 0.99, rendering this finding statistically insignificant at the conventional 5% type I error threshold. However, given that the majority of the cohort participants were younger than the median age of cancer diagnosis in the United States (66; cohort age, 53–70 in 2017), 43 longer follow-up with more reported cancer cases as the cohort ages would increase the statistical power, enable detection of statistically significant differences, and provide more precise estimates of cancer incidence rates. It is important to note that although the difference in all-cancer incidence among lesbian women did not reach statistical significance with our primary SO categorization, this difference reached statistical significance in our sensitivity analyses, which reduces misclassification bias but may have been prone to selection bias. Despite the nuances discussed previously, findings from our primary analyses align with results from Boehmer et al. because no statistically significant differences in cancer burden were detected between sexual minority women and heterosexual women. 34 However, our primary results diverge from the Gonzales and Zinone study, in which bisexual women had higher prevalence of cancer when compared to heterosexual women. 32 Although all three studies, including our present analysis, attempted to assess cancer disparities by SO, it is crucial to note that the prior studies focused on disparities in cancer prevalence, whereas our study assessed disparities in cancer incidence. The discrepancies in findings may stem from differences in the measure of chosen disparities. For our site-specific analyses, lesbian women were about twice as likely to be diagnosed with thyroid cancer, basal cell carcinoma, and non-Hodgkin lymphoma, with no other statistically significant findings at other cancer sites. Our findings were similar to Austin et al.’s null findings for colorectal cancer 28 but differ from Austin et al.’s findings that predicted a slightly higher breast cancer incidence among lesbian and bisexual women. 27 This prior work employed prediction models to estimate future cancer risk, whereas our study directly assessed cancer incidence. Additionally, the prediction models relied on SO data from 1995 alone, whereas the present analyses also incorporated data from 2009 and the more comprehensive data from 2017. Contrary to our null findings, Boehmer et al. reported higher breast and colorectal cancer incidences in geographical areas with higher density of sexual minority populations 29 , 30 Using a different database, the same authors found higher incidence of breast cancer and lower incidence of colorectal cancer among sexual minority populations. 31 The discrepancies in our findings may be attributed to differences in cancer incidence measurements (i.e., indirect vs direct measure). Interestingly, both Boehmer et al.’s study and our present study found sexual minority women to have a lower risk of lung cancer diagnoses despite Underwood et al. and other prior work showing higher prevalence of smoking and lung cancer among specific sexual minority groups; we observed zero lung cancer cases among lesbians and found heterosexual women with prior same-sex history to have lower lung cancer incidence in this cohort. 10 This may be attributed to the overall lower number of lung cancer cases in the NHSII because of lower rates of smoking in this nursing population when compared to the general public. 44 As such, our finding of a lower lung cancer incidence in sexual minority women with low case numbers should be interpreted with caution. Last, a study from Singer et al. found lesbian women to have similar odds of skin cancer and bisexual women to have lower odds when compared to their heterosexual counterparts. 33 In contrast, we detected higher rates of specific subtypes of skin cancer only among lesbian women in the NHSII cohort. Overall, the differences in findings by specific cancer sites may be explained by the limitations of small sample sizes in prior studies, especially for rarer cancers. Other potential factors that contributed to the conflicting findings include differences in SO measures being used in those prior studies. It is challenging to compare findings to earlier studies as measurements of SO have changed drastically over the past few decades. Additionally, comparing results across diverse data sets is challenging because of the varied ways surveys and cohorts define SO. One way SO could be variably captured is through the number of SO dimensions incorporated into the survey. Earlier studies often relied on singular measures of SO via identity or behavior only, whereas our investigation employed a comprehensive approach, considering lifetime identity, attraction, and behavior. Furthermore, the categorization of SO and the subsequent inferences drawn from these categories can differ substantially based on the predetermined options provided to survey respondents. For instance, the 2022 Gallup poll indicated that 58.2% of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transexual adults identified as bisexual, contrasting sharply with our cohort in which only 4.8% of all sexual minority populations identified as bisexual. This difference is not a result of unbalanced sampling of the NHSII cohort, but rather stems from differences in SO categorization: the Gallup poll had one preset category to capture plurisexual individuals, whereas we disaggregated them into three different subgroups (heterosexual with same-sex history, mostly heterosexual, and bisexual) to capture the granularities of cancer disparities among these populations. Despite the challenges delineated here (e.g., inconsistent SO categorization, limited statistical power), a clear pattern of adverse cancer burden among lesbian women was shown in both the all-cancer analyses (statistically significant in the alternate analyses and just below threshold in the primary analyses) and the site-specific analyses (all cancer sites had aIRRs 1, with statistically significant higher rates of incidence at three sites). Null findings for rarer cancers or for sexual minority groups with a lower number of individuals should be interpreted with caution because the result may be due to statistical limitations rather than the lack of cancer disparities in those populations or at those cancer sites. Limitations This study is not without limitations. First, as discussed in the Methods section, we included participants who reported a heterosexual identity but were missing attraction/behavior data in the completely heterosexual reference group. This may result in misclassification bias, but we considered this limitation to be acceptable to avoid selection bias. We conducted sensitivity analyses to assess disparities in incidence using alternate categorization and similarly found sexual minority population, specifically lesbian women, at higher risk of cancer (see Appendix 4 ). Second, we are not able to assess the intersectional effects of sexual and racial/ethnic minority statuses on cancer outcomes because of limited statistical power (more than ~90% of the respondents in this cohort were White). Additionally, our study used data from a cohort of nurses who may have a different pattern of cancer risk factors than the general population (e.g., lower prevalence of smoking); as such, the pattern of disparities in cancer incidence we found in this study may differ from that of the general public. Crucially, our findings of SO-related cancer disparities are among a cohort of nurses with higher health literacy, health care access, and socioeconomic positioning than the general population, which suggests that the true magnitude of SO-related cancer disparities could be much greater in the general population. We acknowledge the inherent challenges in estimating cancer incidence using ongoing cohort studies; one such challenge includes having a large enough sample size of sexual minorities with cancer. However, given current data limitations, our investigation, leveraging comprehensive SO measures with nearly 3 decades of cancer outcomes data, is uniquely poised to contribute to the field and further our understanding of cancer disparities among sexual minority populations. Our intention to prioritize understanding the nuances and heterogeneity of cancer disparities among different SO groups over statistical certainties has resulted in findings with small cell sizes and wide CIs, especially in rarer cancers. Nevertheless, our study benefits from our ability to assess and present evidence of cancer disparities across individual sexual minority subgroups with great nuance because sexual minority women are not a homogeneous group, but a diverse and heterogenous population with unique health needs. Last, although prudent to estimate cancer incidence as soon as the data are available, more follow-up time will allow for more precise measurements and detection of differences in rarer site-specific cancers. An extended follow-up period would also facilitate a more in-depth examination of the cancer stage at diagnosis by SO to inform potential points of intervention along the cancer care continuum. Our results underscore the imperative for further investigation into site-specific cancer disparities and prevention efforts that should be inclusive and tailored to the needs of different sexual minority groups. CONCLUSIONS Sexual minority women, especially lesbian women, may be disproportionately burdened by cancer. Our findings highlight the need to include sexual minority people in cancer prevention efforts and to strengthen calls for health care providers to recognize the impact of trauma, structural discrimination, and stigma in medical settings. Furthermore, our findings confirm an urgent and critical need to include comprehensive, standardized SOGI measurements in electronic medical records, cancer registries, and survey research to quantify the true extent of SO-related cancer disparities for both common and rare cancers. Researchers must recognize the heterogeneity of this population and aim to disaggregate SO subgroups when possible; future research should also focus on examining intersectionality with other forms of minoritization (e.g., racial/ethnic groups, undocumented groups) to understand the unique needs of these multiple-minoritized populations. With these data, we can begin to develop tailored interventions to minimize cancer disparities among sexual minority populations and achieve health equity. Supplementary Material Supplementary Material Additional supporting information can be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of this article.