Background Endometrial cancer (EC) is the most common gynecologic cancer in the U.S. and its incidence is increasing [ 1 ]. The five-year mortality rate among Black women with EC (39%) is nearly double that of White women (20%) [ 2 ]. Contributing to this survival disparity is the fact that more than 60% of Black women are diagnosed with high-risk, aggressive EC types [ 3 ]. These EC subtypes require treatment with adjuvant therapy (chemotherapy, radiation, and/or immunotherapy) to improve survival and reduce chances of recurrence. Differences in the completion of these courses of treatment further contribute to survival inequities in EC [ 4 , 5 ]. Lack of social support and social isolation are contributors to racial health inequities across multiple outcomes, including non-adherence to treatment protocols [ 6 ]. Black women are at an increased need of social support due to social and systemic stressors, lower receipt of quality care, and lower access to health education, all of which can exacerbate social isolation [ 7 ]. Treatment completion has been improved through peer support interventions aimed at reducing social isolation among Black women with breast cancer [ 7 ] and other chronic conditions [ 8 , 9 ]. Effective approaches to decrease social isolation include culturally tailored peer support groups, navigation programs, and behavioral approaches [ 7 ]. Yet, interventions to reduce social isolation and improve treatment completion have not been adapted for Black EC patients and, more broadly, EC research has - until recently - excluded Black people with lived experience with EC as research partners [ 10 ]. To fill this gap, a community-engaged, pragmatic randomized controlled trial to adapt and test social support interventions among Black women with EC – the Social Interventions for Support during Treatment for Endometrial Cancer and Recurrence (SISTER) Study was launched in 2021 at the University of Washington (UW). The SISTER Study protocol (Oluloru et al., 2024) was recently published [ 11 ]. In this commentary, we share case examples of the practices used to engage patients, caregivers, and other stakeholders in the design and early operations of the SISTER Study, including initiation of the partnership. In describing the partnership initiation, we share the foundational values of the SISTER Study. For subsequent case examples of engagement practices, we share the value or values the practice derives from. Finally, we present lessons learned with a focus on operational challenges and successes. We hope this commentary is instructive for teams that aim to engage in community-academic partnerships for health equity research. Initiation of community-academic partnership In response to the lack of EC disparities research engaging Black patients [ 10 , 12 ], the University research team, led by a gynecologic oncologist and health services researcher (author KD), co-founded the Endometrial Cancer Action Network for African-Americans (ECANA) in 2017, funded by a Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute ® (PCORI ® ) Engagement Award [ 13 ]. ECANA’s initial steering group comprised author KD, UW research staff (authors JA and LS), three Black EC survivors as “patient partners” (including author AM and members of the SISTER Study Consortium author group), community advocate and cancer advocacy leader (author BH), a patient centered outcomes research expert (author DL), past and present professional society Presidents, and a gynecologic oncology trainee advisor (author CG). The Steering Group developed a set of values to guide the group’s work that were based on the Public Health Critical Race Praxis (PHCRP) [ 14 ] – a practical research methodology to explicitly address elements of systemic racism at the root of racial inequities in health (see Table 1 , top panel). A critical tenet of PHCRP is “Centering at the Margins,” defined as, “making the perspectives of socially marginalized groups, rather than those belonging to the dominant race or culture, the central axis around which discourse on a topic revolves.” This is an essential component of racial health equity research because it addresses the long-standing exclusion of marginalized populations from engagement in research [ 14 ]. Centering at the margins is particularly important for Black women, and Black people with a uterus more broadly, given the history of their exploitation and traumatization by medical research since the enslavement of Black people in the U.S [ 15 – 17 ]. The PCORI ® engagement principles [ 18 ] – provided as guidance to applicants and awardees—(see Table 1 , bottom panel) were reviewed by the Steering Group, determined to be aligned with the PHCRP-derived values, and also integrated into ECANA’s operations. Table 1 SISTER Study Engagement Values and Corresponding Study Activities Value Exemplar Study Activities Endometrial Cancer Action Network for African-Americans Values We center the voices, values, and needs of Black people with endometrial cancer • Community-needs assessment • Determining Stakeholder Roles in the SISTER Study • Operationalizing stakeholder integration: meeting and communication structure • Incorporating storytelling into meetings • Developing the Engagement Evaluation Plan We communicate clear personal and group intentions and maintain fidelity to them • SISTER Study full team kick-off meeting We have transparency in the process and power • Collaborative Study Design During Grant-Writing • Advocate Advisory Board charter We cultivate creativity and ‘thinking outside the box’ • Determining stakeholder roles in the SISTER Study • Integrating AAB input into study protocols and materials • Developing the Engagement Evaluation Plan We approach inevitable challenges as opportunities and focus energy on solutions, not barriers • SISTER Study full-team kick-off meeting • Evolving modes of communication Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute® Engagement Principles Reciprocal relationships a • Community needs assessment • Determining Stakeholder Roles in the SISTER Study • SISTER Study full team kick-off meeting • Advocate Advisory Board charter Co-learning b • Operationalizing stakeholder integration: meeting and communication structure • Incorporating storytelling into meetings • Integrating AAB input into study protocols and materials Partnership c • Determining stakeholder roles in the SISTER Study • Advocate Advisory Board Charter Trust, transparency, and honesty d • Collaborative study design during grant-writing • Evolving modes of communication Notes: AAB: Advocate Advisory Board; EAB: External Advisory Board PCORI ® Principle Key Elements: a Reciprocal Relationships: Including patient and stakeholder partners as key personnel; roles and decision-making are defined collaboratively b Co-Learning : Researchers help patients and other stakeholders to understand the research process; team learning about patient-centeredness and stakeholder engagement; patient-centeredness and stakeholder engagement incorporated into research process c Partnership: Fair compensation; reasonable and thoughtful requests for time; committed to diversity across all activities; committed to cultural competence d Trust, transparency, and honesty: Inclusive decision-making Information is readily shared; commitment to open and honest communication Guided by these values, ECANA partnered on several research studies and programs based at the University of Washington, focused on awareness-raising, education, and, later, providing social support for Black women with EC. These activities engaged Black EC patients and survivors nationwide [ 19 ]. ECANA operated within the University from 2017–2021 and began operating as an independent 501(c)(3) in December 2021. Co-conception of the SISTER study Community needs assessment In response to survivors’ desires to increase ECANA’s focus on supporting Black EC patients during treatment, the University research team conducted focus groups in December 2019 with survivors engaged with ECANA’s programming [ 19 – 21 ] with a goal of assessing community needs and identifying potential research questions for future funding. Collecting qualitative data to inform research priorities and study aims aligns with the ECANA value of centering the voices, values, and needs of Black people with EC; and the PCORI ® value of Reciprocal Relationships. Themes from the focus groups are described in Gamble et al. (2022) and included, the emotional toll of an EC diagnosis, gaps in informational and emotional support needed following a diagnosis, and internal and external resources Black women with EC draw upon during and after treatment. [ 22 ] Based on these results and literature review the University research team and ECANA conceptualized a community-engaged, pragmatic, randomized controlled trial testing the effectiveness of group and one-on-one peer support interventions during adjuvant treatment for EC – The SISTER Study – that would be guided by ECANA values and PCORI ® principles. Table 2 describes how each stakeholder group informed SISTER Study design during conceptualization and subsequently grant-writing. Table 2 Stakeholder Input and Impact on Study Conceptualization and Design Stakeholders Stakeholder subgroup How Input Informed Planning Survivors ECANA Network of Engaged Patients and Survivors (Black women with endometrial cancer) Identification of social isolation during active treatment as a key need Black women with endometrial cancer from the ECANA network Confirmed the need to evaluate different modes of social support; Identified other contributing stressors (financial need, anxiety) that prompted the addition of relevant survey instruments • Confirmed interest of survivors as peer supporters ECANA Steering Group Patient Partners • Established need for multiple leadership roles for patient advisors resulting in patient leaders of SCC and EC • Selected survey instruments; • Confirmed fair patient reimbursement plan and time commitment Patient Partners agreeing to be Peer Supporters or Advocate Advisory Board members • Selection of final social isolation measure, timing of primary outcome, enhancement of usual care Clinicians Site Principal Investigators • Established high need for support-oriented study, optimal time of randomization to be at the time of treatment recommendation (after surgery) Topic Area Expert Stakeholders All • Confirmed national and cross-sector interest in study results • Support for over-representation of sites in US Southeast Reproductive Justice, Professional Society Leadership, Advocates, Researchers • Established feasibility for national scope, patient-driven, endometrial cancer research Determining stakeholder roles in the SISTER study Further enacting the principles of reciprocal relationships and centering the voices, values, and needs of Black people with EC, and additionally thinking outside of the box, we wanted to integrate Black women with EC, their caregivers, and community advocates at multiple levels of the study. Figure 1 illustrates the SISTER Study team organization, indicating which roles are filled by academic personnel, community partners, or both. We identified roles for paid patient, caregiver, and community partners: 1) Peer Supporters: responsible for carrying out the peer support intervention; 2) a Director of Peer Supporters: responsible for planning the intervention and managing the peer supporters; 3) Co-Chair of an Executive Committee: to provide leadership and strategic direction to the study along with representatives from all study teams and external advisors, and 4) an Advocate Advisory Board (AAB): to provide survivor and caregiver feedback on study activities. Fig. 1 Organizational Chart for the Social Interventions for Support During Endometrial Cancer and Recurrence (SISTER) Study To enact our value of “thinking outside of the box” (deriving from PHCRP’s disciplinary self-critique tenet, which “helps a discipline to shine a light on itself from within in order to understand how its norms may inadvertently buttress disparities.” [ 14 ]), topic areas experts representing areas relevant to the SISTER study, including reproductive justice, clinical trials research, clinical guidelines development, and professional society leadership in gynecologic oncology were contacted individually to provide input on the study concept, design, and potential impact on the field. The team also determined that there would be a Stakeholder Coordinating Center (SCC) with combined University and community leadership to plan and carry out engagement of survivors, caregivers, and other topic area experts. In accordance with the Partnership principle, all patient and community advisory roles were planned to be either University employees (salaried) or contractors (paid hourly). The UW research team invited survivors engaged in ECANA’s programming to be Peer Supporters or Advocate Advisors. Inclusion criteria for invitation were: continued engagement with ECANA, interest in becoming more involved with research partnership, and – to provide peer support – being at least six months out of active cancer treatment. Collaborative study design during grant-writing To maintain integrity to the value of “transparency in process and power” and “trust, transparency, and honesty, stakeholders collaborated on grant writing either through collaboration (ECANA Steering Group members) or an iterative feedback process (invited SISTER patient partners). See Table 2 for all input, by role. ECANA Steering group members attended meetings to brainstorm and develop study design elements. The University research team led grant writing. Any patient or community partner committing to fill a paid role was sent each draft of the research plan and given one week to provide feedback and were also asked to sign a letter of support, drafted collaboratively by the University research team and ECANA. Input from committed patient partners was also solicited specifically for survey instrument selection. Topic area experts engaged during the initial study design were also provided with research plan drafts and – if responsive – subsequently asked to provide letters of support. With every round of feedback, the research team e-mailed a companion document describing how they incorporated stakeholder comments from the previous draft. If feedback was not incorporated, a statement describing why not was included in the document. Any conflicting feedback was resolved in discussions with the University team and ECANA Steering Group. After incorporating feedback, the SISTER study aims were finalized: 1) compare evidence-based interventions (group-based peer support and one-on-one peer support) against each other and against an enhanced version of typical care delivery to understand which is more effective at improving treatment completion among Black women with high-risk EC; 2) determine the extent to which the peer support interventions reduce social isolation during treatment; and 3) evaluate intervention acceptability among patients, healthcare staff, and peer support providers. In November 2020, the team was awarded a PCORI ® Broad – Addressing Disparities award to carry out The SISTER Study. The University research team drafted a study protocol based on the research plan, which was subsequently reviewed by The SISTER Study’s Executive Committee, including AM and BH. The study protocol was approved by the University of Washington Institutional Review Board (STUDY00012990) [ 11 ]. Post-award engagement activities Engagement practices described below utilize the SISTER Study structure described above, where community partners are involved in both the highest-level study decision-making and day-to-day study operations. SISTER Study full team kick-off meeting The team planned to hold a study kick-off meeting shortly following contract execution as a way to align with our value of “reciprocal relationships.” However, patient partners reached out asking to connect and understand the next steps during the several months of contract execution with a moving end date. Noticing an opportunity to maintain integrity with “approaching inevitable challenges as opportunities,” the kick-off meeting was rescheduled to occur sooner. The kick-off meeting was designed to be an opportunity for connection between all community partners, to build excitement among all team members, and especially to finalize the scope and personnel for study roles, (“reciprocal relationships”). All University-based team members, Executive Committee Co-Chairs, and individuals who signed letters of support for the Advocate Advisory Board and Peer Supporters were invited to attend the full-team meeting. The agenda began with an invitation for all attendees, including University-based attendees, to share their personal motivations for involvement in the study (see more about this sharing in Incorporating Storytelling Into Meetings). Subsequently, a presentation on the study background – including partnership initiation, scientific rationale, aims, design, and expectations for patient and caregiver roles including, time commitment, communication, and compensation for advocate advisors and peer supporters. Attendees had the opportunity to ask questions and discuss study roles, primarily to determine understanding and agreement on group intentions and expectations for each role. After the kick-off meeting, patient partners were asked to confirm their preferred study role via email. Advocate advisory board charter We determined that establishing a written set of expectations for Advocate Advisory Board practice was an important way to operationalize the principles of “transparency in process and power,” “partnership,” and “reciprocal relationships.” [ 18 ] The goal of this “charter,” was to be a basis for mutual expectations on the advisory board and between AAB and University-based team members, and as an onboarding tool for new AAB members and study staff. We set out to create the charter through collaboration and consensus-building so the process could further enact “transparency in process” and “reciprocal relationships.” First, the Stakeholder Coordinating Center leadership adapted a charter originally developed by the Comparison of Intravesical Therapy and Surgery as Treatment Options for Bladder Cancer (CISTO) study [ 23 ]. The draft included a study overview, how each study team relates to and works with one another, expectations for time commitment and communication (including confidentiality of study information), and planned amount and procedures for paying advocate advisors as consultants. The charter was circulated to Advocate Advisory Board members prior to the first board meeting and reviewed live during the meeting. AAB members then reviewed the charter independently, with specific instructions to give input on what would make them feel like valued parts of the team. Members provided written feedback, which included requests for details about how study staff will use different modes of communication and expected timelines for AAB members to provide input on study materials. The next draft of the charter included these details and line-item edits from advisors. Advisory board members reviewed again and signed the charter to signify agreement. The final charter, with signatures, was circulated to all members. Operationalizing stakeholder integration: meeting and communication structure We aimed to develop a meeting and communication structure to operationalize the integration of stakeholders at multiple levels of the study team in a way that would maintain integrity to our value of “centering the voices, values, and needs of Black women with EC” and enable “co-learning.” Table 3 details recurring SISTER Study meetings. We also wanted to maximize the potential for study findings to be relevant, meaningful, and effective by ensuring community voice was well integrated. To incorporate community partners at the highest level of study oversight, we planned to hold monthly meetings of the Executive Committee, chaired by an academic research and community partner (author BH) and attended by the PI and representatives from each branch of the study team, including the Director of Peer Support (patient partner, author AM). The Executive Committee reviews study updates, decisions made throughout the month, and makes key decisions about study design, data collection, analysis, and dissemination. To integrate community partners at more granular levels of decision-making, the community partner Executive Committee Co-Chair and Director of Peer Support also attend a weekly study operations meeting, in which day-to-day details about engagement and study operations are discussed and refined. As a staff member, the Director of Peer Support also attends all research team meetings, in which the team may address any unresolved questions from the operations meeting. The Director of Peer Support liaises with Peer Supporters, who – during the study start-up – gave input on recruitment and retention materials. For example, Peer Supporters collaborated to develop a recruitment video in which they share their experience receiving support and their hopes for the SISTER Study [ 24 ]. Simultaneously, the community partner Executive Committee Co-Chair meets with the SCC to plan engagement activities for the AAB, based on study events, decisions, and upcoming needs that came up at study meetings, who provide patient and caregiver experience to inform all participant-facing materials and procedures. The AAB planned to meet bi-monthly or quarterly, depending on study needs. Table 3 Frequency and Composition of SISTER Study Meetings Meeting Title Attendees Frequency Topic Areas Executive Committee PI, Executive Committee Co-Chairs, Executive Committee members, including Directors of each study team branch, University Research Staff Monthly Study progress updates, discussion topic based on study needs Intervention Coordinating Center (also known as Research Intervention Operations) Director of SISTER Study Sites, Director of Peer Supporters, Senior Advisor to Stakeholder Coordinating Center/Co-Chair of Executive Committee, University Research Staff Weekly Review and decisions about research and stakeholder operations Core Study Team PI, Co-Chair of SCC, Director of Peer Supporters, Director of SISTER Study Sites Weekly Review and discussion of priority decision-points, adjudication of unresolved priority issues from other team meetings Data Coordinating Center PI, Director of Data Coordinating Center, Director of Study Sites, Center, Director of Peer Supporters and Biostatistician as needed Weekly Data collection and analysis, participant enrollment systems Stakeholder Coordinating Center (SCC) Co-Chairs of the SCC, Senior Advisor to the SCC, University Research Staff, other staff as invited based on specific agenda items Bi-weekly (every two weeks) Stakeholder engagement External Advisory Board PI, External Advisory Board members, Co-Chairs of SCC, Senior Advisor to the SCC Quarterly Study progress updates, discussion topic based on study needs Advocate Advisory Board Advocate Advisory Board, Co-Chairs of the SCC, Senior Advisor to the SCC, University Research Staff Bi-monthly (every two months) Study progress updates, discussion topic based on study needs, reflection on stakeholder engagement activities Finally, EAB meetings occur twice yearly. They are designed through a collaboration between SCC leadership, the PI, and administrative research staff. Meetings include study progress updates and priority discussion topics that the University-based research team selects to draw on the expertise of EAB members. Requests to review study materials may be focused on the EAB in general or members with specific expertise. For example, the University research team requested input on an initial communications plan from EAB members who regularly develop communications for national audiences though they may not focus specifically on gynecologic oncology or randomized controlled trials. This allowed SISTER Study communications to expand beyond a grounding in a clinical research framing to include community-building and communication practices more typically found in reproductive justice or policy advocacy work. To ensure centering of community partners and representation of other stakeholders in dissemination, we established a publication committee that includes up to two representatives from each sub-group of the SISTER Study team. The publication committee is responsible for approving the concept and content for each study manuscript and abstracts. The author list of all study manuscripts – including this one – consists of lead authors and all members of the publication committee. Incorporating storytelling into meetings Our intention for starting the study kick-off meeting with personal sharing and hearing patient partners’ stories was to enact the principle of “centering voices.” However, we quickly discovered that this sharing – especially because of sharing from researchers – also became a means to enact bi-directional “co-learning” in which community partners can learn from – and build trust with – academic-affiliated team members. From this point on, we incorporated an invitation for this type of personal storytelling into the beginning of most meetings – and all meetings with community partners. Throughout the 18 months of preparation and launch of the study, the SISTER Study team routinely incorporated storytelling into meetings, enacting both co-learning and centering the voices of Black women with endometrial cancer. At the kick-off meeting, attendees reflected on race, gender, study role, cancer experience, and longevity working in an academic-community partnership. Attendees drew on a range of experiences, such as personal illness, moral convictions, commitments to health equity for the Black community, and intellectual interests and curiosity. Subsequent AAB meetings opened with a question that each Advisory Board member and Stakeholder Coordinating Center facilitator is invited to answer. This facilitated further personal story-sharing. Throughout the study launch and start-up, agendas remained spacious – by prioritizing only a few key agenda items – to permit impromptu sharing and will continue to be so throughout the duration of the study. Additionally, the first annual full team meeting (one year after contract execution) included time for the University research team to celebrate partnership successes by sharing progress from the time since the last meeting, followed by an opportunity for stakeholders to reflect on their own experiences of success. This structure allows patient and caregiver stories to define indicators of study success (“centering voices”) and facilitates co-learning as research faculty and staff understand what study events are meaningful to patients and caregivers, and vice versa. Integrating advisory board input into study protocols and materials We wanted to create a review process for participant-facing protocols and materials that would maximize opportunities for novel ideas and integrating lived experience in order to align with the values of “cultivating creativity and thinking outside of the box” and “co-learning” by engaging in an open feedback loop about research decision-making. In this spirit, AAB members have the opportunity to review all new or revised participant-facing protocols and materials. In some cases, the review may be discussion-based. For example, advisors discussed ways to improve successful outreach to participants during the stressful time period immediately after diagnosis during which they are enrolling in the study. In other cases, AAB members review lengthier materials – for example, survey instruments – between meetings. Following the AAB review of protocols or materials, SCC leadership provides a written overview of how and why the team did or did not incorporate feedback into the final product, including comments the research team was unable to incorporate (e.g., changes to validated instruments). This enacts “co-learning” by giving stakeholders an opportunity to learn more about research and the University research team learns about stakeholder perspectives on participant-facing materials. This feedback is then reported at the weekly study operations meeting, which includes the Director of Peer Supporters (patient partner) to determine the feasibility of implementation, and make a decision, if possible. At monthly Executive Committee meetings, which include the community partner Executive Committee Co-Chair, the feedback – and any associated decisions – are reviewed to ensure there is no unintended impact on study rigor, and to make any feedback not yet resolved. In this way, community partners are involved at multiple levels of study decision-making, through the entire process of reviewing materials and protocols, integrating feedback, and ensuring integrity to study design and rigor. Evolving modes of communication While the team had established a mutually agreed-upon charter, clear structures and roles, and multiple modes of communication, we knew that maintaining trust required being responsive to any changes in what partners want or need in terms of communication. Also, we knew there would inevitably be critical feedback about engagement approaches and activities as the study evolved. To stay in alignment with “approaching inevitable challenges as opportunities” we encouraged AAB to provide feedback, framing any feelings of tension as the sensation of an exciting opportunity to improve rather than an indication of failure or a barrier to success. We had an opportunity to put this into practice about a year into the study when AAB members shared they wanted more communication from the study team, especially more detailed updates (a “behind the scenes” look) at day-to-day study operations and any decisions made in that context. Our communication strategy evolved in two main ways based on this feedback. First, the SCC leadership team incorporated more granular updates into AAB meeting presentations. We also launched a quarterly newsletter for the AAB, EAB, and Peer Supporters. Each newsletter contained updates on enrollment, data collection, and operations, and a paragraph from a Peer Supporter describing their experience implementing the intervention. This evolution in our communication with AAB members fulfilled advisors’ desire for more comprehensive and frequent information. Developing the engagement evaluation plan In considering how to evaluate engagement in the SISTER Study, our main goal was to maintain integrity to “centering the voices, values, and needs of Black people with EC” rather than evaluating engagement from the perspective of research outcomes only. There is a lack of clear consensus in the literature regarding methods for such evaluation [ 25 – 29 ] and many engagement measures are designed only for the context of a simple advisory board structure [ 27 ]. This gave us an opportunity to develop practices to enact our value: “thinking outside of the box.” The SCC team first set about to identify community and academic partners’ goals for engagement. To define engagement goals from the perspective of the study team, the SCC team facilitated a lightly structured conversation with the PI and researcher partner Executive Committee Co-Chair. To define goals from the community partners’ perspective, the AAB, Director of Peer Supporters, and community partner Executive Committee Co-Chair were asked to write down their goals for the engagement process and outcomes. The SCC then created engagement objectives in alignment with goals. The Executive Committee, Advocate Advisors, and External Advisory Board members reviewed the engagement objectives, which were then revised to incorporate input. To select data collection tools to measure the study’s progress toward these objectives, SCC facilitators scanned the literature and online repositories of engagement resources and identified several validated survey tools and other strategies to measure engagement that could effectively assess the identified engagement objectives. The AAB reviewed the options and selected as data collection tools: the brief version of the Research Engagement Survey Tool (REST short form) [ 30 ], documentation of stakeholders’ review of materials, semi-structured discussions yearly during AAB meetings, and meeting notes. The AAB was particularly drawn to the REST measure because the research studies in which it was developed included Black women, it describes engagement metrics outcomes from community partner perspectives, and it captures the engagement process and not just the impact of engagement on research outcomes. Lessons learned Overall, we learned that it is possible to design and operationalize a community-engaged pragmatic randomized controlled trail in alignment with a race equity, social justice research methodology and patient centered outcomes research engagement principles by intentionally selecting engagement practices. It is feasible to position community partners in the SISTER study as the “central axis” around which the study revolves [ 31 ] by including Black EC patients and caregivers in roles of study leadership and day-to-day operations. On reflection, there were several operational challenges that provided lessons for future engagement practices in health equity research. First, maintaining multi-level integration of stakeholders brought up the operational challenge of creating enough recurring meetings that would ensure transparency and bi-directional communication and co-learning, but not overwhelm the team with excessive or redundant meetings. We learned to confront this challenge by periodically assessing and then adjusting feedback loops between subgroups of the study team. Another operational challenge arose during the period of administrative activities, following award notification. The academic team unilaterally chose not to gather stakeholders until contract execution because it was assumed that meeting before compensation was possible would violate the value of “partnership” and its fair compensation elements. Feedback from stakeholders told a different story; communication and aligning expectations was more important – at that time – to enhancing trust than waiting for a fully established administrative structure and payment system. We learned that communications and expectation-setting should occur on a timeline of trust-building that is highly specific to the partnership. Finally, our orientation toward flexibility and responsiveness to stakeholders occasionally meant sometimes saying no to emerging community interests or desires to ensure integrity to the study plan. While these moments provided an opportunity for “co-learning” they also had the potential to generate conflict. We learned that having established early consensus around both study values and the scientific research plan served as stable cornerstones and a stabilizing force to maintain mutual trust in these instances. Other lessons learned come by way of practices we would repeat in future studies or new partnerships. While the primary focus of our engagement framework and practices is centering community members, we learned that an External Advisory Board was a feasible companion body to patient and caregiver roles. This is particularly important to future health equity research as narrowing to a single disciplinary perspective may inadvertently reinforce or reproduce racial inequities through unexamined frameworks or methods [ 14 ]. Sharing personal intentions for study involvement, was another particularly promising practice. Reflecting on this practice, we noticed that it can bring self- and group awareness to team members’ perspectives, which are grounded in personal experiences, identities, and positional perspectives. This practice can help to uncover underlying biases and to bridge differences in perspectives between researchers and community partners. Researchers sharing intentions is particularly important in the context of research institutions’ historic exploitation of Black people, which has led to earned distrust of researchers among many community members [ 15 , 16 ]. Storytelling as an engagement strategy was an unplanned approach, but we quickly learned that it was an important relationship-building aspect of meetings. Storytelling is particularly salient for marginalized populations and for many Black or African-American women in particular, for whom oral knowledge tradition is an historically rooted means to navigate and resist systems of oppression, build relationships, and share health information [ 32 , 33 ]. Providing opportunities for stakeholders to participate in storytelling places these culturally specific practices for community-level resilience at the center of the research process and “centers at the margins” to improve the impact of health equity research [ 14 ]. Finally, we learned that using iterative processes of collaboration, feedback, and consensus-building can be effective for maintaining integrity to multiple values. We used these tools at multiple research stages, including setting mutual expectations for a community advisory board, developing an advisory board charter, incorporating feedback into study materials and protocols, and adjusting communication approaches. The latter provides an additional lesson that transparency, honesty, and trust are not static, but rather are cultivated, by providing opportunities for stakeholders to voice changing needs and then acting accordingly. Conclusions The development and early stages of the SISTER Study provide a case study of stakeholder engagement in the context of health equity research, grounded in Public Health Critical Race Praxis [ 14 ]. The SISTER Study team created an academic-community partnership that centers the voices, values, and needs of Black women with endometrial cancer, and established processes that have the potential to sustain these relationships for the five-years of the SISTER Study and additional ancillary projects. To be effective, health equity research requires a comprehensive approach to confronting systemic forms of inequities head-on [ 34 ]. We found this to be possible through creating guiding values couched in frameworks that encourage addressing the root causes of health inequities, which can help realize the potential of health equity research by addressing systemic racism through all elements of a study, including community partnership. The SISTER Study’s core engagement practice – integrating patient and community stakeholders at multiple levels of the study – from major study decisions to tactical study operations – maximizes the potential for findings that are relevant, meaningful, and effective. This commentary is intended to share and reflect on engagement practices during the design and launch of the SISTER in the start-up phase. We did not employ objective engagement measures during the study design and launch. However, there are multiple objective engagement measures being employed during the conduct of The SISTER Study that will be reported alongside study results. The SISTER Study is an example of establishing a values-aligned approach to stakeholder engagement within an area of study and population that has been underrepresented in stakeholder-engaged research and may be instructive for community-academic partnerships seeking to advance equity in process and outcomes of health services research.