Introduction Every year, over half a million women are diagnosed with cervical cancer worldwide [ 1 ]. It is the third most common cancer in women aged 25–49 [ 1 , 2 ]. In 2023, 325 women were diagnosed with cervical cancer in Norway [ 3 ]. Precise data on the prevalence of cervical cancer among women from ethnic minority backgrounds remain unavailable, primarily due to the scarcity of research focusing explicitly on this population. This underscores need for further investigation to generate comprehensive and detailed data in this area. Cervical cancer is primarily caused by the sexually transmitted human papillomavirus [ 1 ]. Stage I (A + B) represents an early stage with a good prognosis, whereas stage IV (A + B) indicates an advanced stage with a poor prognosis. The smallest tumours are treated surgically, while stage IB–IV tumours are treated with a combination of daily radiotherapy (external and internal) and weekly chemotherapy [ 2 ]. Patients from minority backgrounds who have cancer face two major challenges when interacting with the healthcare system in a foreign country. The first challenge is the language barrier, where the varying availability and quality of interpreter services can exacerbate the difficulty faced [ 4 , 5 , 6 ]. A Norwegian study conducted by Latif et al. [ 8 ] suggests that it is plausible to assume that minority women from Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and Somalia experience reduced access to healthcare diagnostic services. This limited access may be attributed to various factors, including communication barriers within the Norwegian healthcare system, particularly those related to language. Such barriers may also contribute to the finding that patients from minority backgrounds receive less information compared to their non-minority counterparts [ 10 ]. The second challenge is a lack of fundamental health knowledge and a limited understanding of their condition. Latif et al. [ 8 ] found that cultural barriers among minority women from Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and Somalia may result in a lower rate of self-examination, which may lead to the diagnosis of breast cancer at a more advanced stage. Such issues are often rooted in cultural differences and divergent perceptions of illness and health [ 7 , 9 ]. Moreover, the fixation procedures and treatment technology used in radiotherapy may lead to anxiety, which can be further exacerbated by communication difficulties [ 11 ]. A limited understanding of the treatment that patients with cancer undergo can cause frustration and anxiety among women from minority backgrounds [ 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 ]. Research indicates that most women prefer having family members act as interpreters, although a small proportion prefer professional interpreters because they feel that family members tend to omit important information [ 13 ]. Another culturally conditioned challenge is the presence of male healthcare personnel. Women from minority backgrounds report feeling uncomfortable with male healthcare personnel and preferring female staff [ 15 , 17 ]. Healthcare in Scandinavia, emphasises person-centred care, where patients are encouraged to actively participate in the care process [ 18 ]. However, this can be challenging when the patient comes from another country, the patient does not speak the language and healthcare personnel are unfamiliar with the patient’s culture. There is currently insufficient knowledge about the challenges faced by minority women with cervical cancer and their experiences of cancer treatment in Norway. Hence, this study sought to explore how these women experienced their encounters in the radiotherapy department and gain insight into how their cultural background influenced these experiences. Methods This study has an exploratory qualitative research design. In accordance with its methodological framework, a phenomenological and hermeneutic approach to health and illness was applied [ 19 , 20 ]. Phenomenological research seeks to investigate individual human experiences as they manifest in daily life and specific situations, as described in the participants’ own words [ 20 ]. Hermeneutics relates to the methods used in understanding and interpreting such phenomena in a comprehensible manner [ 19 ]. In this context, understanding is based on the preconceptions and contexts of the individual participant and the researcher, and it evolves throughout the research process [ 21 ]. Participants The participants had all been treated for cervical cancer in the Department of Oncology at Oslo University Hospital (OUH). A purposive sample was selected, consisting of ethnic minority women who were born and raised in South Asia (India and Pakistan), but who moved to Norway after the age of 18. The participants’ ages ranged from 30 to 55 years. Procedure The participants were identified and informed about the study by an oncologist at OUH. Ten women were initially approached. A letter providing detailed information about all relevant aspects of the study was sent to them. The information was translated into both Punjabi and Urdu. The seven women who agreed to participate received a phone call from the first author to schedule an interview. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. Following the interviews, the participants were also provided with the opportunity to speak with a psychiatric nurse at OUH. Data collection Based on each participant’s preference, the first author conducted the interviews at the participants’ home (n = 5), in a library (n = 1) or at the participant’s workplace (n = 1). The interviews were conducted by the first author in Punjabi and Urdu, according to each participant’s preferences. The first author was born and partially raised in India and speaks Punjabi, Hindi and Urdu fluently. A semi-structured interview guide was used, and each interview lasted 60–120 min. The interview questions were designed to capture the participants’ subjective experiences of cervical cancer treatment ( Table 1 ). The gathered data were later translated and transcribed verbatim by the first author. The data were stored on a secure server at OUH, and all transcripts were de-identified. This study was approved by the institution’s data protection officer (no. 21/21149). Table 1 Interview questions and sub-questions. What did you know about cervical cancer? - What is your understanding of the causes of cervical cancer? What knowledge did you have of radiotherapy? - How did you acquire this knowledge? How did you perceive your access to information about your treatment? - To what extent do you feel the information provided was sufficient? - What barriers, if any, do you feel might have affected your ability to access information about your treatment? How did you experience the cancer treatment? - What aspects of the treatment did you find most challenging? How were you supported in the radiotherapy department? - What needs did you have during your treatment? - How did you perceive the support you received in addressing your needs? With whom did you discuss your feelings about the cancer diagnosis? - How did these discussions influence your emotional well-being and understanding of your diagnosis? How did your diagnosis and treatment affect your family life? - In what ways did your family members support you throughout your diagnosis and treatment? Analysis Reflexive thematic analysis [ 22 , 23 ] was used to identify patterns across the dataset. The entire dataset was inductively coded by hand by the first author, with codes subsequently grouped into categories, themes and concepts. Following initial coding, the researchers examined the data to identify overarching categories, patterns and discrepancies. The findings were then discussed by the research team, who reached consensus on the final themes. Throughout the analysis process, the research team returned to the original data to check the themes and quotes and to ensure that the meaning had not been lost during interpretation. The quotations that effectively illustrated the team’s analytical points were identified in the transcripts [ 19 , 22 , 23 ]. Results The women had been treated with a combination of external and internal radiotherapy for cervical cancer, together with weekly chemotherapy (cisplatin). The external radiotherapy was given in daily fractions, Monday to Friday, for five weeks (25 fractions). Subsequently, the women received four fractions of internal radiotherapy within approximately two weeks. Hence, the total treatment time was approximately seven weeks. The participants had not received any other cancer treatment. The demographic data of the participants are shown in Table 2 . The participants had all completed their treatment at the time of the interviews. In this article, the participants are identified using fictitious names to preserve anonymity and confidentiality. Table 2 Participants’ demographic information. Participant Age Education Years residing in Norway Marital Status Employed Children Diagnosis Period Roshni 40–44 Primary School 4 Divorced No 4 2015–2020 Rani 40–44 Higher Education 14 Divorced Yes 0 2015–2020 Begum 50–54 Primary School 32 Married No 5 2015–2020 Naila 45–49 Primary School 28 Divorced Yes 4 2015–2020 Mina 50–54 Secondary School 30 Married No 3 2015–2020 Noor 30–34 Higher Education 10 Married Yes 2 2015–2020 Salma 50–54 Primary School 34 Married No 3 2019–2024 Three dominant themes were identified regarding the experiences of ethnic minority women when undergoing radiotherapy in Norway - namely, cultural issues, linguistic challenges and loneliness and vulnerability ( Table 3 ). Table 3 Key themes from the analysis of the interview data. Themes Codes Cultural issues Male radiation therapist, culturally adapted information, unanswered questions, stigma, social position, grateful for Norwegian healthcare Linguistic challenges Did not speak Norwegian, needed an interpreter, shortage of time, communication problems, lack of information, unanswered questions Loneliness and vulnerability Position in family, divorce, native language support groups, missing family Cultural issues The participants reported that their dignity was compromised when they received radiotherapy conducted by male radiation therapists, as they had to undress and lie exposed in front of these unknown men. They felt they had to sacrifice the principle of covering themselves in front of men, which was fundamental to their culture and something they had always adhered to. “When I lay on that treatment table, I used to look at the machine and think: What kind of illness have I got that requires me to expose myself to others? I hoped there would be women operating the machine. I know there can be male radiation therapists as well. But I didn’t like it. It was embarrassing. I couldn’t relax.” (Rani) During external radiotherapy, the patient lies on the treatment table without clothing on her lower body, just covered by a small sheet of paper. The radiation therapists, who can be female or male, position the patient correctly by lifting and adjusting her. The participants were told by the radiation therapists about the importance of precision during radiotherapy and asked to lie still and relaxed on the table throughout each radiotherapy session. However, the participants experienced difficulty relaxing when treated by male radiation therapists and were uncertain whether the treatment was performed accurately due to their tense state. “They wanted me to relax. I tried my best, but it was a bit difficult with a man touching me. I’m not sure if I received the correct treatment because of that.” (Mina) The participants often uncritically accepted their doctors’ decisions, viewing the doctors as authority figures who made correct decisions. They lacked courage to ask both general and critical questions about the information they received. While most participants had attended their last radiotherapy session a few years ago, they still had many unanswered questions about the process. “Why wasn’t I informed before the treatment that I wouldn’t be able to have children? [ … ] I still wonder why I had to keep my uterus when I can’t have children anyway.” (Rani) Healthcare professionals provided the participants with information, although this information was either insufficient or incomprehensible due to linguistic and cultural barriers. The participants had no prior experience of cancer and were unfamiliar with cervical cancer. Consequently, they were unprepared for how the disease and the side effects of its treatment would impact their lives, both physically and culturally. “The healthcare professionals were kind and treated me respectfully. However, I needed a lot of information that was tailored to me. You see, so that I, being from Pakistan, could understand.” (Naila) Each participant received a vaginal dilator after completing radiotherapy, but most perceived it as a sex toy and chose not to use it due to cultural norms forbidding such tools. During a gynaecological examination following treatment, Naila experienced severe pain that prevented the doctor from thoroughly examining her. When the doctor asked if she had been using the vaginal dilator regularly, Naila admitted that she avoided using it because she found it too embarrassing. After the doctor explained the importance of using the dilator to prevent vaginal adhesions following radiotherapy and enable pain-free examinations, Naila realised that it was not a sex toy but a necessary medical aid. It was only then that she began to use the dilator. Begum, however, understood the purpose of the vaginal dilator but chose not to use it. She perceived the dilator as a replacement for her husband, which she felt was wrong. She feared that if she replaced him with the vaginal dilator, he might again seek out other women for sex, as she had previously experienced infidelity in her marriage and did not wish to relive that. She also considered that such equipment conflicted with her religious and cultural beliefs. Thus, despite experiencing pain during intercourse, she remained steadfast in her decision not to use the dilator. “In our culture, it is not permitted to use such things. So, I never touched them.” (Begum) Linguistic challenges The participants found communication with healthcare professionals challenging due to their limited language proficiency. Interpreters were provided for medical consultations and the initial radiotherapy session, but not for subsequent radiotherapy appointments. Participants who were accompanied by family or friends used them as interpreters, while those without companions during radiotherapy were unsure how to contact a doctor or nurse when needed. Perceptions of when interpreter services could be utilised varied among the participants. Those with some proficiency in Norwegian and English chose not to use interpreters. Others felt that while daily interpreter services were unnecessary, having an interpreter in certain situations would have made it easier to communicate their needs to the radiation therapists. “The interpreter did not arrive. The doctor believed that I spoke English well enough. It was not easy for me to explain anything in English. My English is not very good either, you see. So, I always wondered if what I said was understood by the healthcare professionals.” (Roshni) While the radiation therapists provided sufficient information, there was no guarantee that the participants understood the details. Salma recounted being instructed to follow a drinking protocol before each radiotherapy session, which required her to drink three glasses of water. She thought it might be beneficial to drink even more. As a result, she did not comply with the drinking protocol prior to radiotherapy. This led to an excessively distended bladder, causing the displacement of the target volume outside the radiation field. “At first, I did not fully understand the point of the specified amount of water. They told me to drink three glasses, but I used to drink five glasses of water. I thought it would be even better.” (Salma) The participants who were accompanied by their adult children discovered that they frequently omitted vital information. These participants found comfort in the presence of their children during medical consultations, but they were less appreciative of the information filtering. Crucial information about the severity of their illness, treatment, prognosis and long-term side effects was withheld, albeit with the best intentions. “My children chose to interpret for me, but they filtered out much of what the doctor said. They kept telling me, “Relax, Mum, you are perfectly healthy.” I mean, if I were healthy, what was I doing visiting the doctor then?” (Begum) Despite the lack of cultural understanding and tailored information, the participants all expressed immense gratitude for the healthcare they received in Norway. This was despite having unmet needs and unanswered questions. They compared the healthcare in Norway with what they would have received in their home countries. Their experiences of healthcare in their home countries were not particularly positive, as healthcare was sometimes inaccessible and often depended on their financial situation. “I am just so grateful to be in Norway and to have received such fast and excellent care. If I had been in my home country, I would probably be dead by now.” (Rani) Loneliness and vulnerability Each participant expressed the need to discuss their personal experiences of the cancer diagnosis and treatment. However, their limited understanding of the disease, compounded by linguistic obstacles, left them feeling vulnerable. “I was just shuttled around like a football. As far as I remember, no support groups were recommended. Cancer treatment should be about more than just machines and radiation.” (Roshni) Rani expressed profound sorrow over having a non-functional uterus, feeling a sense of alienation regarding womanhood. She experienced loneliness in Norway, as her husband had abandoned her following her cancer diagnosis. Two other participants, who also endured marital dissolution following their cancer diagnosis and lacked family support in Norway, echoed this sentiment. Many participants did not have anyone to talk to about their illness, its treatment and the associated challenges. They avoided discussing their condition with relatives, perceiving gynaecological cancer as shameful and fearing it might harm their family’s reputation. As a result, they hid their illness from everyone except immediate family. This caused an unmet need for professional support, particularly from someone who could communicate in their own language. Begum highlighted this need during her interview, emphasising the importance of having a trusted professional to share experiences with. “It was a relief to express all that weighed on my heart with you […] It is not easy. You feel alone with those feelings. I wish I could have talked about my feelings with a nurse who spoke Urdu.” (Begum) Those participants who had the opportunity to participate in support groups hesitated to do so, finding participation overly challenging due to lacking knowledge or energy to express themselves in Norwegian. “They told me about cancer support groups in Norwegian while I was undergoing treatment. I barely had the energy to sit upright. How was I supposed to muster the strength to formulate sentences in a language I have not mastered well enough?” (Naila) Discussion The women’s experiences of radiotherapy were complex and influenced not only by their disease and treatment but also by linguistic obstacles and cultural challenges during interactions with healthcare professionals. Cervical cancer was unknown to all the participants, and none of them had any prior experience of radiotherapy. It is critical that important information is understood and followed during treatment. However, due to their insufficient understanding of Norwegian, it proved challenging for the patients to derive meaning from the information provided by healthcare professionals. It was necessary to thoroughly explain everything in a language they fully understood so that the women could understand the purpose of the preparations for radiotherapy. When encountering specialist healthcare services, many patients, both ethnic Norwegians and minorities, experience the medical language and culture as foreign [ 20 ]. Indeed, medical terminology contains concepts that are challenging for most people to understand, even those familiar with the language [ 20 ], and for our participants, the lack of fluency in Norwegian was especially challenging. The women felt unable to express their needs due to a lack of time and language proficiency. This increased their risk of enduring persistent discomfort and pain. Minority women may receive poorer care and follow-up due to communication difficulties [ 10 ]. It takes courage and time to formulate sentences in a language that is not well mastered. Cancer patients may also face challenges in finding information about measures to control side effects or pain caused by radiotherapy due to language barriers [ 10 ]. Some women who had limited Norwegian language skills chose not to use interpreters during consultations. It is possible that they underestimated the need to do so. Mastering everyday Norwegian may be insufficient when trying to understand information about the cancer diagnosis and treatment process. One participant who chose not to use an interpreter said that her doctor failed to inform her she would not be able to have children after radiotherapy. It is possible that she did not understand the information due to the complexity of the conversation. Research shows that many patients, despite stating they do not need an interpreter, face significant communication challenges [ 4 , 9 ]. Moreover, due to time constraints, it is possible that healthcare professionals do not have the opportunity to thoroughly assess each patient’s need for an interpreter. Ordering an interpreter takes time and resources, and it may be easier to take the patient’s word that they understand the language, even though this may result in insufficient two-way communication. Tailored information is crucial to enhancing patients’ understanding of their illness and improving their cooperation with the healthcare system [ 20 ]. Several years after completing radiotherapy, most women still had unanswered questions. This may indicate that they did not receive sufficient information or did not understand the information provided. It also raises questions about whether the requirement for informed consent for all forms of healthcare was adequately upheld [ 24 , 25 ]. Research indicates that many immigrant women from Southeast Asia who arrive in Norway as adults encounter challenges when learning and using Norwegian, even after many years in the country. This complex phenomenon is influenced by various social, cultural, individual and structural factors [ 26 ]. Our participants lacked sufficient understanding of both Norwegian and English to comprehend the information provided, which needed to be understood for them to be able to ask critical questions. Language is a factor that influences an individual’s health literacy, which involves the ability to communicate with healthcare professionals [ 27 ]. In these women’s culture, doctors are authority figures, and their decisions are not questioned [ 28 ]. This, combined with linguistic obstacles, meant that the women were unable to ask general or critical questions during treatment. The findings of this study underscore that the use of interpreters could greatly enhance understanding and awareness of one’s illness, thereby facilitating clearer communication. The availability of easily accessible interpreter services, supported by digital communication tools, could further mitigate these communication barriers. Moreover, the study highlights need for translated written materials, ensuring that essential information remains accessible beyond the consultation setting, while also enhancing health literacy among ethnic minority groups. Our participants also experienced challenges related to cultural norms and values. Being treated by male radiation therapists conflicted with their upbringing and cultural norms. Due to cultural restrictions on interactions between unrelated men and women, it would be preferable for female healthcare personnel to treat minority women during radiotherapy [ 29 , 30 ]. One effective approach could be the implementation of mandatory cultural competence training for healthcare professionals. This training would equip providers with the knowledge and skills necessary to understand and respect the diverse cultural backgrounds of their patients. Culturally sensitive care can improve patient satisfaction and healthcare outcomes [ 30 , 31 ]. The communication style within South Asian communities often seeks harmony, and critical remarks are frequently viewed as offensive [ 32 ]. Our participants, however, chose to remain silent about their discomfort, fearing they might be perceived as difficult. An important finding of our study was that the lack of culturally adapted information contributed to many women not using necessary tools, such as vaginal dilators, following treatment. While some did not understand the rationale behind using the dilator, others chose not to use it due to cultural norms. This underscores the necessity for culturally sensitive, tailored information and additional resources for individual consultations with healthcare professionals who possess an understanding of cultural nuances and can communicate in patients’ preferred languages, or who ensure the presence of an interpreter during consultations. Although interpreter services are institutionalised, the challenge often lies in effective utilisation and ensuring the availability of an appropriate interpreter for each consultation. To address this, establishing clear, standardised protocols for the use of interpreter services can promote consistency and reliability. These protocols should include guidelines for booking interpreters in advance, ensuring that the right interpreter, with both linguistic and cultural expertise, is available. Some of the participants experienced existential vulnerability when they were diagnosed and underwent treatment. Those who separated from their husbands during the radiotherapy process and who did not have relatives in Norway felt significant loneliness, despite being surrounded by friends. Family holds great importance for women from South Asia, where many are raised in extended families and illness is considered a family matter [ 13 , 15 , 33 ]. At the same time, the stigma associated with cancer, which remains prevalent in South Asia, may contribute to women’s reluctance to discuss their illness with others [ 33 , 34 , 35 ]. Despite hiding their cancer diagnosis from their social circle, our participants expressed a need to converse with someone in their own language and with a shared cultural background - a need that was not met. To participate in support groups, people must be willing to share personal experiences and insights with others [ 28 ]. This proved challenging, as some participants preferred not to discuss their illness experiences with other minority patients due to cultural barriers. Individual conversations with healthcare professionals who speak their language could be an alternative, although this would require time and resources. Our participants were very grateful for the healthcare they received in Norway, despite their unmet needs. This gratitude may be related to low expectations of the healthcare system among patients with low educational attainment and poor prior experiences with healthcare services in their country of origin [ 36 ]. A limitation of this study is the small sample size, which may limit the generalisability of the findings. However, qualitative research does not seek representativeness; rather, it aims to elucidate the phenomena that participants experience from their own perspectives. Moreover, the sample selection proved adequate in this study, as the narratives were rich and full of nuanced examples. Conducting interview in the participants native language is considered as a strength of this study. However, a limitation is that all translations were carried out solely by the first author, as the other members of the research team lacked proficiency in Punjabi or Urdu. Consequently, they were unable to cross-check or validate the translations, which may have introduced potential biases or inconsistencies in the translations. Furthermore, member checking was not conducted due to language barriers that would have required considerable time. Conclusion This study highlights the multifaceted nature of minority women’s experiences with radiotherapy, shaped not only by their diagnosis and treatment but also by linguistic and cultural barriers. The lack of proficiency in Norwegian significantly hindered the participants’ ability to understand critical medical information and express their needs, thus increasing the risk of inadequate pain management and discomfort. Language, as a barrier to health literacy, exacerbated their challenges in navigating the healthcare system and contributed to communication gaps, which, in turn, affected their overall treatment experience. The findings emphasise the vital role of interpreters in improving understanding and communication. Accessible interpreter services, supported by digital tools, could reduce communication barriers and ensure accurate information exchange. Moreover, enhancing the intercultural competence of radiation therapists is essential to improving their sensitivity and effectiveness in working with minority women. Efforts should be made to accommodate patient preferences, including the gender of healthcare providers, to foster a more culturally sensitive and comfortable experience. This also involves encouraging the women to request female radiotherapists or interpreters, if possible. Cultural mediators, both within healthcare settings and broader community spaces, can facilitate open discussions about cancer in general, and cervical cancer in particular, or develop community outreach initiatives and tailored health education campaigns. Such efforts may play a pivotal role in reducing the stigma associated with cervical cancer within minority communities. These interventions could not only improve outcomes for minority women but also positively influence overall healthcare outcomes for all minority groups. Further research in this field is necessary to gain a deeper understanding of the specific needs and effective strategies for supporting minority populations in cancer care. Additionally, exploring ways to enhance health literacy among minority patients is crucial. Funding The Department of Radiography, Oslo Metropolitan University facilitated proofreading and access fee. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that influence the work reported in this paper.