WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC Access to public diagnostic facilities in India is uneven, with limited data available on spatial distribution aligned with population needs. WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS This is the first study to geo-map government diagnostic facilities in Delhi and introduces three novel indicators—LDR, facilities per 100 000 people, and the PALM ratio—to assess service adequacy. HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH, PRACTICE OR POLICY The findings provide a framework for evidence-based planning and equitable placement of diagnostic facilities using GIS, which can guide both public policy and private sector investment. Introduction Delhi, the national capital of India, is the most populated national urban area and the third largest urban area worldwide. With a population of 31.7 million 1 and population density of 11 320/km 2 , the diagnostic healthcare system in Delhi needs to be robust and organised and of high quality to provide uninterrupted diagnostic services. The national capital is also an important medical tourism destination within India, as well as for people coming from different parts of the world. Diagnostics in Delhi are provided by both government and private organisations. However, the city’s diagnostic healthcare service system suffers serious challenges. The entire network is fragmented, and delivery of services is through different platforms like hospital (public and private)-based laboratories, stand-alone laboratories and diagnostic chains. Duplication of facilities is also rampant. The percentage expenditure on healthcare in Delhi in 2018–2019 was 1.1% of the Gross State Domestic Product, which has limited the capacity and reach of government diagnostic facilities. 2 The decision to choose a specific diagnostic healthcare facility requires information about the distance of the facility, test cost, turnaround time for the test result and compliance of the facility to quality standards ( online supplemental figure 1 ). However, at present, no such data are available in the public forum or published literature for the common man to refer to. A rigorous and thorough mapping of laboratory services to construct centrally available laboratory data will provide such information and is essential to outline existing variations to provide performance metrics for change and upliftment of the services. The effect of the geographical location of services on the health of the population is increasingly examined with the help of geomapping through geographic information system (GIS). Multiple attributes are important for defining service adequacy of any healthcare services for a segment of the population. These include types of facility and socioeconomic factors that define affordability, travel distance that defines accessibility and quality and menu of tests that define availability and acceptability. GIS defines accessibility by assessing the volume of services relative to the population size and proximity of services relative to the population location, which in return can help policymakers increase accessibility to develop a cost-effective healthcare delivery model. 3 The role of GIS in healthcare was first demonstrated in 1948 by John Snow, where he identified the source of the cholera outbreak in London by mapping the locations of afflicted patients. Since then, WHO 4 has emphasised the importance of geographical mapping of healthcare services and has developed a free toolbox ‘AccessMod’, which uses the analytical capacities of GIS to assess target population, availability and accessibility coverage. WHO-CHOICE 5 is another such initiative aimed at guiding countries to decide healthcare priorities using GIS to determine physical accessibility to health services. Public health departments, research organisations, hospitals, medical centres and health insurance organisations are adopting GIS to use its resource-integration capacities to create solutions. How consumers access the services is mainly governed by geographical location. Matching service locations assure that laboratories are equally spaced across the country and specialised services required by specific populations are located reasonably close to them. Haider et al 6 used mapping to identify hot-spot cases for COVID-19 in Afghanistan by geospatial analysis of confirmed cases, deaths and recovered cases. This in turn helped the government in managing and controlling the pandemic. GIS has also been widely employed in designing evidence-based action strategies for reducing cancer burden. ‘Geohealth’ is a California-based company that helps match the location and type of workload of healthcare providers using GIS. Clark et al 7 applied geographical modelling techniques to quantify spatial access to health services before and after an acute cardiac event, which could be used to inform planning of cardiology health services. Another French study 8 measured the potential geographical accessibility of healthcare facilities from call to definitive care for patients with acute stroke and concluded that GIS is recommendable for measuring accessibility in healthcare to highlight care delays. This can affect patient care and help redesign the healthcare organisation. They also recommended using the same approach for other pathologies. Many such studies have evaluated the access to health facilities (such as national cancer facilities and 9 public health facilities for vector-borne disease control) 10 and designed strategies for the placement of new healthcare facilities (such as phlebotomy centres 3 ) worldwide. Rushton et al 11 integrated geocoded data from the cancer registry with spatial analysis to identify locations with reported late-stage colorectal cancer at the first diagnosis. This would help reduce the cancer burden by correlating these data with patterns of risks associated as an illustrative for action-oriented research. Tarlov et al 12 used GIS to study the correlation between the characteristics of neighbourhoods (distance, social characters, age, race, etc.) with the incidence of advanced stage breast cancers. They concluded that women who lived farther away from facilities were less likely to go for mammography. A similar series of studies 13 17 used Google Maps for distribution mapping of cholangiocarcinoma in Thailand. In the USA, districts with the highest rate of occurrence of late-stage breast cancer were identified by collecting data on the incidence of late-stage breast cancer, socioeconomic factors and availability and utilisation of cancer screening. GIS was used to map and highlight areas that have any combination of high late-stage breast cancer incidence and significantly associated risk factors. 18 Besides the studies mentioned, a massive amount of literature relating to the use of GIS for measuring physical accessibility to healthcare exists, and a number of publications review the various methods used. 19 28 Several examples of applications of these methods to improving or designing new facilities in developing and developed countries can be found in various studies. 22 GIS has also been widely used to identify the socioeconomic, geographic or correlating factors associated with disease occurrence. 1629 33 In India, Singh et al assessed the distribution of dengue cases in Delhi by GIS, 34 thereby enabling he identification of hot spots and high-risk areas to assist healthcare providers in accelerating the implementation of prevention and management strategies. Another study 35 in Vellore (Tamil Nadu, India), while characterising the CTX-M strain of E. coli using PCR were able to identify clustering among patients, healthy individuals and contaminated environmental points using spatial presentation of GIS mapping. While geospatial data analysis for healthcare in India was used in limited studies, many studies have assessed the effectiveness and variations in healthcare service delivery 36 40 and studied disease trends or outcomes 3641 47 and the impact of intervention systems 3848 52 for improved healthcare delivery by geomapping. GIS has been used in 17 studies 3953 68 for the evaluation of health-related aspects or health facilities in India. Studies on mapping for cases of malaria, dengue, improving HIV care, assessing the preparedness of primary health centres (PHCs) for non-communicable diseases, notifying tuberculosis (TB), identifying cholera outbreaks and assessing environmental or high-risk factors for kala-azar, COVID-19, etc., have been done using GIS. However, until only a single study 69 has utilised GIS to the test the availability status in selected districts of India. This study analyses the sufficiency/scarcity and distribution of the existing government diagnostic healthcare system in Delhi, which is the capital of India, as a preliminary analysis to utilising this model to map the whole country and the services available in these facilities. Materials and methods The data related to government diagnostic laboratories was collected and compiled at the National Institute of Pathology - ICMR between January 2023 and July 2023. As the data collected were available online, no ethical clearance was needed. The flowchart depicting the methodology is illustrated in online supplemental figure 1B . Study setting and study area Indian states and union territories are divided into districts (geographic boundaries) for administrative purposes. The healthcare system in India is a three-tier system, and laboratory services are provided at PHCs providing primary level care, community health centres (CHCs) and subdivisional hospitals providing secondary level care and district hospitals (DHs) and medical colleges providing tertiary level care. For this exercise, we collected, compiled and analysed the data related to Delhi. Delhi is divided into 11 districts, namely, North, South, West, East, North East (NE), North West (NW), Central, New Delhi, South West (SW), South East (SE) and Shahdara. 70 The Delhi government has also launched the community clinics initiative (‘Mohalla clinics’, in vernacular) in July 2015 to enhance the healthcare facilities at the primary care level. Step 1: Preparing data catalogue Government health facilities with functional diagnostic services in Delhi were catalogued from online database and listed. 71 The next step was to categorise the type of facilities. Government facilities were grouped into the following: Tertiary level hospitals/medical colleges District/subdivisional hospitals PHCs/CHCs/Delhi government dispensaries Mohalla clinics IOnline supplemental table 1 enumerates the total number of diagnostic facilities in each category mentioned above. 72 However, all the facilities have been used under the common term ‘government health facilities with diagnostic services’ in the sections that follow. Step 2: Building maps 73 Spatial data, that is, the latitude and longitude of each diagnostic facility, were derived from Google Maps. Attribute data, that is, the name and type of facility, were tabulated in an Excel sheet. The inbuilt geo-mapping software of Google Maps analysed and represented the spatial and attribute data of diagnostic facilities in a graphical form. 74 The digital maps thus created represented diagnostic healthcare facilities as pins on the map of Delhi. Step 3: Website development The code to connect, store/update and retrieve data from the database was written in PHP, and the website was developed using WordPress. Step 4: Development of heat maps and Moran’s index Heat maps were made in ArcGIS Pro using the Density toolset. The Kernel Density tool calculates a magnitude-per-unit area from point or polyline features using a kernel function to fit a smoothly tapered surface to each point or polyline. Spatial autocorrelation measures the correlation that a variable has with itself throughout its spatial extent. Moran’s index is one such spatial autocorrelation technique that measures how clustered any instances are. For this, it requires a geometry, usually a polygon or a point and associated values, for instance, a Moran’s index of greater than or less than zero implies that similar or dissimilar values are likely to be clustered together, respectively. Since Moran’s index is a measure of how strongly data are spatially clustered, it is also vital to find out hotspots and cold spots of instances. In this context, diagnostic cold spots within the state can be associated with poor public health monitoring systems. In the case of point geometries, such as locations of diagnostic centres in Delhi, the computing of Moran’s index to find hot and cold spots requires two values: (i) cell size and (ii) distance band. The cell size is used to create individual cells containing one or more diagnostic centres, and the distance band specifies the distance until which diagnostic centres have been considered to calculate hot and cold spots. The distances used for these are (i) 800 m for the cell size to represent the average walking distance at the neighbourhood level and (ii) 16 115 m for one-time origin–destination commute for four-wheeled vehicles in Delhi. Step 5: Assessing the adequacy of government and private diagnostic facilities As different districts vary in their population and area, the total number of diagnostic facilities in a district does not appear to be an accurate representation of the adequacy of diagnostic healthcare systems for a given area/unit, as illustrated in online supplemental table 2 . Literature was reviewed for objective parameters that are being/have been used or recommended for assessing the equity of the healthcare system. The ratio of providers to patients has been used by the European Commission 75 and other organisations 76 as one of the tools for assessing the performance of primary healthcare. To ensure that health systems are equipped to meet the needs of the population, WHO uses the parameter ‘density of laboratory health workers (per 1000 population)’. It serves to monitor and strengthen the health workforce and guide policy-making. 77 Another study 78 correlated patient outcomes with the number of healthcare providers per 1000 people. To assess the adequacy of diagnostic facilities in different districts, three parameters were derived, that is, (i) laboratory density ratio (LDR), (ii) number of laboratories per 100 000 people and (iii) the population to laboratory medicine facility (PALM) ratio. i. Laboratory density ratio The LDR is calculated as the number of diagnostic laboratories per km 2 of area. As the number of facilities increases and/or area decreases, the LDR increases. ii. Number of laboratories per 100 000 population : Let’s say that a particular district like district ‘A’ has a higher laboratory density with 100 than district ‘B’ with 50. However, the population of district ‘A’ is higher (1 000) than that of district ‘B’ (500). As can be interpreted, the diagnostic facilities of district ‘A’ would thus be insufficient for the area despite having an LDR higher than district ‘B’. We derived the ‘number of laboratories per 100 000 population’ as an independent parameter to depict the possible adequacy of the diagnostic healthcare system in a unit. = T o t a l n u m b e r o f l a b o r a t o r i e s o f d i s t r i c t ‘ A ′ T o t a l p o p u l a t i o n \of d i s t r i c t ‘ A ′ × 1000 Total population of district ‘A’ iii. PALM ratio: The average number of people a diagnostic facility caters to will affect the performance of the facility in terms of accuracy, turnaround time and quality. To remove the effect of the confounding variable, that is, high population on the outcome, that is, number of diagnostic facilities, the PALM ratio is proposed. It will act as a measure to assess the burden on healthcare diagnostic laboratory services in each area . For example, the PALM ratio for district ‘A’ is calculated as follows: P o p u l a t i o n \Density o f t h e d i s t r i c t ‘ A ′ L a b o r a t o r y D e n s i t y o f D i s t r i c t ‘ A ′ = Number of people per diagnostic healthcare facility Step 6: Correlation with census data 7479 81 Census data of Delhi were downloaded, and the following variables were extracted for each district: the fraction of urban/rural population of a district, literacy rate, percentage of people living with multidimensional poverty, percentage of population suffering from chronic illnesses and percentage of people undergoing screening for cervical, breast and oral cancer. Data have been tabulated in online supplemental table 3 . Each of the above-mentioned variables was analysed statistically to check for possible correlation between the sociodemographic profile of a district and the diagnostic facility infrastructure. Variables chosen in online supplemental table 4 have been chosen as per all the authors’ discretion. Authors have identified variables that have a correlation coefficient of 0.1 and thus might depict significant correlation to the diagnostic healthcare infrastructure. Step 7: Data analysis Unweighted data were cleaned and subsequently analysed by Stata 14 (Stata Corp., College Station, TX, USA). District data were presented as numbers and mean (SD) or median (IQR) by the district area, district population and number of diagnostic facilities. Categorical variables were compared by the χ 2 or Fisher exact test to find the significant differences in each category between districts. The district-specific, type of facility-specific PALM ratio was calculated, and Pearson’s correlation coefficient was calculated to measure the strength of association among all variables. Continuous variables were compared by the independent t test (following normal distribution) or Wilcoxon rank-sum test (non-normally distributed variables). A p 0.05 was taken as statistically significant. Results Maps of distribution of diagnostic centres Using ArcGIS Pro, distribution maps of diagnostic facilities across Delhi were built. The heat maps clearly demonstrate the clustering of diagnostic facilities in the central regions of Delhi, where there are more diagnostic centres within 800 m walking distance ( figure 1A-C ). Figure 1 (A) District-wise distribution of government diagnostic facilities. (B) Number of facilities per 100 000 people. (C) Diagnostic facilities within walkable distance (800 m). Graphs demonstrating the values of (D) the density of government diagnostic facilities. (E) Number of diagnostic facilities. (F) Number of people per diagnostic facility in each district. Public/government diagnostic healthcare infrastructure The number of government diagnostic facilities across Delhi ranges from 8 (New Delhi) to 93 (NW district) (Table 1). The median government diagnostic facility density in Delhi is 0.6 facility/km 2 (IQR 0.5 facility/km 2 ). The diagnostic facilities are most dense in the district of central Delhi (3.0 facility/km 2 ). However, they are scarcely distributed (0.2 facility/km 2 ) in the districts of South, SW and SE Delhi. The median number of diagnostic facilities per 100 000 people is 4 (range, 1–11; NE district, central Delhi). The median number of people per government diagnostic facility, that is, the PALM ratio, is 25 992 people/laboratory (IQR 20 714). The PALM ratio is the highest in NE Delhi, that is, 78 336 people for a single government diagnostic facility, and the lowest in Central Delhi (9 368 people/laboratory) ( figure 1D– F , table 1 ). Table 1 Public/government diagnostic healthcare infrastructure in 11 districts of Delhi No. Name of districts Population density (per km 2 ) Area (km 2 ) Total government health facilities providing diagnostic services (number) Density of government health facilities providing diagnostic services (per km 2 ) No. of government diagnostic facility per 100 000 people PALM ratio * (public) 1 North 14 557 59 58 1.00 7 14 808.00 2 South 11 060 250 59 0.20 2 46 864.40 3 West 19 563 112 72 0.60 3 30 431.30 4 East 27 132 64 54 0.80 3 32 156.40 5 North East 36 155 52 24 0.50 1 78 335.80 6 North West 8254 130 93 0.70 9 11 537.80 7 Central 27 730 25 74 3.00 11 9368.20 8 New Delhi 4057 22 8 0.40 9 11 156.80 9 South West 5446 420 88 0.20 4 25 992.30 10 South East NA 333 61 0.20 NA NA 11 Shahdara NA 60 45 0.80 NA NA Total 11 320 1527 636 0.40 4 27 174.20 PALM = Population to Laboratory Medicine facility ratio. It indicates the average number of people served per diagnostic facility and reflects diagnostic service burden. District-wise population density, area, and facility counts are based on latest available census and government health infrastructure data. * Population to laboratory medicine facility (PALM) ratio indicates the average number of people served per diagnostic facility and reflects diagnostic service burden. District-wise population density, area, and facility counts are based on latest available census and government health infrastructure data. Sociodemographic characteristics The median population and median area in Delhi is 2 241 624 (IQR 1 902 347) and 64 km 2 (IQR 198 km 2 ), respectively. The median population density in Delhi is 14 557/km 2 (IQR 18 878). The population density is the highest in NE Delhi and the lowest in New Delhi, whereas SW Delhi has the largest area of 420 km 2 and New Delhi district the smallest (22 km 2 ). The median rural population in Delhi is 12 193 (IQR 80 836). The NE district has the highest percentage of poor population (7.35%) and West Delhi the lowest (2.29%). The NW Delhi district has the largest number of illiterate population (n=9 48 684) and New Delhi the smallest (n=27 825). The mean (SD) percentage of households under the financing scheme is 25.2% (5.74%). An average of 49.5% (5.07%) of women (aged 15–49 years) and 69.6% (3.54%) children (aged 6–59 months) are anaemic in Delhi. A total of 267 053 (median 23 521; IQR 8 818.5) people in Delhi suffer from chronic diseases (cancer, cardiac disease, blood circulatory disease, diabetes, HIV/AIDS, haemophilia, leprosy, respiratory disease/asthma, TB and thalassaemia]. NE Delhi has the highest population with chronic diseases (n=42 125) and New Delhi the lowest (n=6828). The median percentages of the population of districts that has ever undergone screening for breast, cervical and oral cancer are 0.2% (IQR 1.1%), 0.6% (IQR 1.4%) and 0.5% (IQR 2.5%), respectively ( online supplemental figure 2A-E ). Heat maps and Moran’s index The 522 diagnostic centres were used to make 405 weighted polygons based on the occurrence of diagnostic centres within them. While one centre was required for any such polygon to be formed, it was as high as four in Shahdara, with the mean diagnostic centre per polygon at 1.2889 with an SD of 0.5692. Among the 522 diagnostic centres in Delhi, 153 were significantly likely to be a part of ho tspots that were mostly concentrated in NE Delhi and parts in and around Old Delhi. Eight cold sSpot centres were also identified, all located within the outskirts of South and SW Delhi ( Figure 2A-F , online supplemental table 4 ). Figure 2 ] Moran’s index for the spatial distribution of diagnostic centres within Delhi, (B) Moran’s index values of diagnostic centres overlapped with the prevalence of anaemia, (C) households under the health insurance scheme and (D–F) screening rates of cervical, breast and oOral cancer, respectively. Website Access to the location and availability of the tests is a dire need, and in such a large country as ours, we need resources to identify them. We have adopted GIS for its resource-integration capacities to create solutions for identifying the diagnostic healthcare services. We have constructed a user-friendly and comprehensive dynamic online website to showcase the availability of relevant laboratory services. A website linked to a dynamic database, and a map has been created with the domain www.icmrdisha.in . At present, we have catalogued the government-run diagnostic facilities in Delhi. It is a free public resource for locating the nearest diagnostic health facilities, which will enable increased utilisation of public health services. The website provides a searchable database for users to locate the nearest diagnostic healthcare facility. Based on the selected state and district, the website provides the list of healthcare facilities with diagnostic services and navigation directions to the respective facility. Areas with an imbalance between population densities and diagnostic facilities can be identified with the help of the map reflected on the website. The data would empower public health experts and government policy-makers with objective parameters to consolidate the diagnostic healthcare system by empowering the existing laboratories or creating new facilities where necessary Correlation between variables measuring healthcare infrastructure and socio-demographic variable An inverse correlation exists between the density of government diagnostic facilities and the total population of the respective district (r=−0.453; p 0.05) (Table 2). However, the number of people per diagnostic facility (PALM ratio) correlates positively with the total population (r=−0.354; p 0.05). The facilities in areas of high population density are overburdened (reflected by a high PALM ratio) (r=0.592; p=0.09). The governtment diagnostic facility density and PALM ratio of a district are inversely correlated (r=−0.361), although the association is not statistically significant (p=0.34). Districts with high percentages of rural, illiterate and poor populations have low densities of government diagnostic facility (r=−0.239, r=−0.408 and r=−0.163, respectively; p 0.05). These districts, however, have a higher number of people per a single government diagnostic facility (PALM ratio) (r=0.225, r=0.394 and, r=0.114, respectively; p 0.05) compared with districts with lower percentage of rural, illiterate and poor populations. The density of government diagnostic facilities has a negative correlation with the percentage of households under a financing scheme (r=−0.309; p=0.36). Moreover, the percentage of anaemic children and women in a district correlates inversely with the density of diagnostic facilities in the respective districts (r=−0.392; p=0.23) (figure 3A-E). ( figure 3A-E , table 2 Figure 3 Correlation between the population density of a district to government laboratory density. (B) Number of facilities per 100 000 people. (C) Correlation plots between the government diagnostic facility density and the PALM ratio with socio-demographic factors. Table 2 Correlation coefficients and p values among different parameters Diagnostic facility density (government ) PALM ratio (government ) Correlation coefficient P value Correlation coefficient P value Total population (number) −0.453 0.22 0.354 0.35 Rural population (number) −0.242 0.53 −0.225 0.56 Urban population (number) −0.452 0.22 0.385 0.31 Illiterate population (number) −0.421 0.26 0.394 0.29 Working population (number) −0.453 0.22 0.301 0.43 Population suffering from multidimensional poverty # (%) −0.163 0.67 0.114 0.76 Households under financing/insurance scheme (%) −0.309 0.36 −0.134 0.73 Children (aged 6–59 months) who are anaemic(%) 0.069 0.84 −0.856 0.05 Women (aged 15–49 years) who are anaemic (%) −0.392 0.23 −0.287 0.45 Population suffering from chronic diseases * (%) 0.483 0.74 0.087 0.82 Population suffering from cancer (%) 0.027 0.05 0.080 0.05 Population who had ever undergone a screening test for cervical cancer (%) 0.485 0.11 −0.244 0.52 Population who had ever undergone a breast examination for breast cancer (%) 0.719 0.05 −0.612 0.08 Population who had ever undergone an oral cavity examination for oral cancer (%) 0.458 0.08 −0.482 0.18 Correlation coefficients are based on Pearson’s method. A negative value indicates an inverse correlation and a positive value indicates a direct correlation. A p value 0.05 was considered statistically significant. * Population to laboratory medicine facility (PALM) ratio = number of people per government diagnostic facility in the district. It reflects diagnostic service burden. † Diagnostic facility density = Number of government diagnostic facilities per square kilometre. ‡ Correlation coefficient values (r) are calculated using Pearson’s method to measure the strength and direction of linear association between variables. § Multidimensional poverty (%) is based on standard indicators including education, health, and living conditions. ¶ Chronic diseases include cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, respiratory disease/asthma, HIV/AIDS, haemophilia, TB, and thalassaemia. %, Percentage; km², Square kilometre; PALM, Population to Laboratory Medicine facility ratio; p value, Probability value indicating statistical significance; r, Pearson’s correlation coefficient. The density of diagnostic facilities correlates directly with the number of people suffering from chronic diseases (r=0.482; p=0.74). The percentage of people undergoing screening for breast, cervical and oral cancer correlated positively with the density of government diagnostic facilities (r=0.719; p 0.05, r=0.485; p 0.05, and r=0.458; p 0.05, respectively) and negatively with the PALM ratio (r=−0.612, r=−0.244 and, r=−0.482, respectively; p 0.05). Discussion The Lancet commission examined the diagnostics in low- and middle-income countries to conclude that annual 1.1 million premature deaths could be prevented if the diagnostic gap (the imparity in healthcare system, where people living with a disease are left undiagnosed due to the unavailability of diagnostic healthcare services) that exists in common diseases, such as diabetes, HIV, TB, hypertension, hepatitis and syphilis, could be reduced from the existing 35%–62% to 10%. 82 Although the primary healthcare system is the last mile affecting the rural, poor and marginalised communities, only 19% of the world’s population has access to the basic simple diagnostic tests at the primary care level. Access and availability are defined to be a confluence of multiple parameters; however, geographical distance to the facility is a key determinant. 83 Delhi is home to 1.68 crore people living in an area of 1 483 km 2 . There is a total of 636 government-run health facilities providing diagnostic services in Delhi, 174 of which are PHCs/U-CHCs and 404 are Mohalla clinics. However, when the number of facilities was correlated with the population characteristics, the findings were worrisome. There are only four government-run diagnostic service facilities per 100 000 people and 0.4 diagnostic facility per km 2 , and each facility caters to approximately 28 000 people. Districts with high population densities have more people per facility (r=0.556; p=0.12), indicating overstraining of the diagnostic healthcare system. Laboratories in developing African countries have also been found to be sparsely distributed, and where present, access is often observed to be limited by economic or geographical factors. Among all the districts, Central Delhi has the most satisfactory healthcare system with 3.0 diagnostic facilities per km 2 and 9 400 people for a single facility. The number of diagnostic facilities in Delhi and other countries with low socio-economic status is positively associated with the population density. 75 A large subset (24.13%) of Delhi’s population is illiterate, 4.79% is poor and 2.49% resides in rural areas. Although there is wide variation in the fractions of illiterate and poor populations residing in different districts of Delhi, NW and NE Delhi together house the largest share (1.46 crore illiterate, 2.5 lakh rural and 4.2 crore poor). However, both do not have any tertiary-level government diagnostic facility. The poor and illiterate, when in need of a diagnostic service, do not have the information on key criteria (such as the location or presence of a nearby government facility) to make a rational decision. Niti Aayog, the apex public policy consultant of the Government of India, 75 reports that two-thirds of individuals are hence diverted to the private sector, which provides costlier services, 84 thereby increasing the national economic burden. 85 With 78 336 people for a single facility, the diagnostic healthcare system is most overburdened in the NE district among all districts, further destabilising the already strained healthcare system. Accurate laboratory characterisation and cause-specific treatment approach is critical for timely treatment 86 and decreasing the global burden. The prevalence of anaemia has increased over the years in India, and currently, 67% of children below 60 months of age and 57% of reproductive-aged women have haemoglobin less than 11 g/dL.[89] In Delhi, 69% of all children aged 6–59 months and 50% of reproductive-aged women are anaemic. This study shows that the government diagnostic facilities in Delhi’s districts with a high case load of anaemia among children and women are less burdened and hence in a better capacity to support and provide follow-up (p 0.05 and p=0.45, respectively). On the contrary, countries such as Bangladesh, Nepal, Uganda, Rwanda and Malawi have exceptionally low availability of diagnostic facilities at the primary care level for the detection of anaemia (0%–20%). This might account for the inability of national health programmes in these countries to lower the disease burden of anaemia among women and children. 75 However, until now, only one study 69 has attempted to evaluate the test availability status in the Indian diagnostic healthcare system. The increasing global burden of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) is creating a disproportionate impact on economically developing countries like India [90]. Diagnosis, grading, therapeutic monitoring and management of NCDs is based on criteria governed by laboratory diagnostics. Inadequate monitoring is responsible for unnecessary prescription costs and long-term disease complications [91]. The support of a well-equipped diagnostic healthcare system is hence becoming more crucial. Of the 6.3% of the population suffering from diabetes in the USA, 5.2 million people are unaware of their disease [91]. Annual active screening identified 285 previously unrecognised cases of diabetes, 73 cases of chronic kidney disease and 669 positive colorectal screens per 10 000 people via laboratory evidence [92]. Around 2.6 lakh people suffer from chronic diseases* in Delhi. These include diabetes, hypertension, cardiac disorders, haemophilia, thalassaemia, HIV and TB. The gold standard diagnostic tests for all these diseases are based on pathology and laboratory medicine. NW Delhi houses the highest number of people living with chronic diseases and New Delhi the lowest. However, the diagnostic facilities in both the districts are equally burdened (one laboratory catering to 11 000 people of the respective district; r=0.087; p=0.82). The Lancet commission on diagnostics analysed a series of studies on chronic diseases, finding a significant association between lower socioeconomic status and a lower probability of being tested.[93] Studies have shown that essential diagnostics like basic chemistry tests, complete blood count, etc., many of which are crucial for diagnosis and monitoring, have availability of only 46%–62%, even at the tertiary level. Bangladesh has 5% diagnostic laboratories for sugar monitoring at the primary care level. 75 Developing countries alone account for 56% of all newly diagnosed cancers and 70% of worldwide cancer mortality [94]. Laboratory screening tests are valuable health prevention tools to identify the early stages of cancer and substantially improve overall survival. A delay in laboratory diagnosis of four cancers in England, caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, is estimated to result in 3 000 additional deaths in the next 5 years.[95]. Researchers [96] have used GIS to study the correlation between the characteristics of neighbourhoods (distance, social characters, age, race, etc.) with the incidence of advance-staged breast cancers. They concluded that women who lived farther away from facilities were less likely to go for mammography. Cervical, breast and oral cancers are a few for which the cost-to-benefit ratio justifies the use of screening tests. In resource-constrained low- and middle-income countries, the tests for laboratory diagnosis of NCDs like cancer are often unavailable or affordable. Sub-Saharan Africa has reported under-utilisation of laboratory screening procedures, especially for cervical cancer with rates as low as 2% in urban areas and 0.4% in rural areas.[97] Improvement in laboratory diagnostic capacity is crucial for improved cancer care.[94] One of the many barriers that prevent people from undergoing laboratory tests for cancer screening is the geographical distance to a diagnostic facility. Central Delhi has the highest density of diagnostic facilities and least burdened facilities among all the districts. Its direct impact can be seen in having the highest fraction of people undergoing screening tests for cervical, breast and oral cancer among all districts of Delhi (p=0.11; p 0.05; and p=0.08, respectively). One of the solutions for empowering the diagnostic healthcare system is to identify areas with limited accessibility and equip them. WHO emphasises that since geographical distance is one of the factors that define adequacy, geographical mapping of healthcare services is important and has a deep impact on the health outcome[98]. GIS has been used to map high-risk regions for controlling diseases, measuring accessibility and quantifying spatial access to health services. 36 9 17 In India, geospatial analysis has been previously employed to assess variations in healthcare services, study disease trends and outcomes and analyse the impact of intervention systems for improved healthcare delivery. 3848 52 We have used GIS to decipher the geographical distribution of facilities. Heat maps created in the study demonstrate higher density and clustering of diagnostic facilities in central zones of Delhi and scarce to low density of facilities in the peripheral zones. This observation implies that the mean distance travelled by patient to access a diagnostic facility is less in districts that fall towards the centre, like Central and SW Delhi. However, patients in other districts travel farther distances to get themselves tested. This can serve as a guide for public policy-makers and as an opportunity for private stakeholders to empower and equip districts. However, since digital health records are unavailable in India, it is difficult to calculate the mean distance of travel to a diagnostic facility, as a measure to gauge accessibility, which has been done in other parts of the world. Although diagnostic facilities in Delhi are provided by both private and government facilities, to the best of our knowledge, there is no catalogue of ‘diagnostic healthcare facilities’ in India. We have attempted to catalogue the government facilities providing diagnostic services. Objective evaluation of the barriers in seeking and receiving care is also unavailable. Rigorous and thorough mapping of the laboratory services segments populations into health need-based groups. This will generate centrally available laboratory data and provide performance metrics for change and upliftment. The map will also serve as a ready reckoner for patients and clinicians to find a diagnostic healthcare facility at a convenient location and as a route map for public policy-makers to strengthen under-equipped areas. The findings of this exercise can serve as a benchmark to gauge progress towards implementing national guidelines such as the National Essential Diagnostics List and Free Diagnosis initiatives and pave the way for strategies for the placement of new healthcare facilities. Timely, accurate diagnosis and efficient patient management will improve disease outcomes and decrease long-term disease morbidity. With effective utilisation of public health services, rural healthcare delivery would be strengthened, and by reducing the out-of-pocket expenditures, there will be an overall reduction in healthcare costs. This study has several limitations. The diagnostic health infrastructure is continuously evolving, with many new facilities being constructed, old ones being repurposed or the test menu being expanded. With these changes, the database has to be kept up to date and revised periodically to be useful to the common man. The districts in India are subdivided into further small units, wards. Ward-level sociodemographic details are unavailable, which would better indicate accessibility. One limitation of this study is its treatment of states. Hence, the number of people these facilities cater to may be underestimated when calculations are based solely on the population of the respective district. This oversight might lead to inaccuracies in assessing the capacity and demand of these facilities. In addition, many of the districts are on the border of neighbouring districts, and these facilities will be serving as a catchment area for the nearby population, thus overburdening the laboratory, but this factor has not been accounted for. Conclusion Geographical accessibility remains a significant determinant of healthcare service adequacy. Our geo-mapping of diagnostic facilities identifies several 'cold spot' centres, primarily located on the outskirts of South and SW Delhi. These cold spots reflect areas where residents face considerable barriers to accessing essential diagnostic services, contributing to delayed disease detection and treatment. Our findings indicate that districts with more robust diagnostic infrastructures exhibit higher rates of cancer screening and other chronic disease monitoring. This correlation underscores the pivotal role of accessible diagnostic services in enhancing public health outcomes. In contrast, districts such as NE Delhi, plagued by inadequate diagnostic facilities, experience poorer health indicators, necessitating immediate policy interventions. The study underscores the imperative of a uniformly accessible diagnostic healthcare infrastructure across Delhi. Ensuring equitable access to diagnostic services can facilitate early disease detection, improve monitoring and significantly reduce the morbidity and mortality associated with chronic diseases. Policy-makers must prioritise the expansion of diagnostic facilities in underserved areas, particularly in NE Delhi, to bridge the existing healthcare gap. Comprehensive geo-mapping of diagnostic services should inform the design and implementation of an efficient, equitable diagnostic healthcare system, ultimately enhancing public health outcomes city-wide. Recommendations from the study We recommend a series of policy interventions aimed at enhancing diagnostic facilities, particularly in underserved districts like NE Delhi. Immediate action is crucial to address these gaps. Additionally, expanding the network of government diagnostic laboratories is essential to ensure that no region remains underserved. Strategic placement of new diagnostic centres can be effectively guided by utilising geo-mapping, thereby ensuring optimal accessibility for all populations. To increase public engagement, community-based programmes should be implemented to raise awareness about the availability and importance of these services. Furthermore, establishing a system for continuous monitoring and evaluation of the distribution and accessibility of diagnostic services is vital for sustained improvement and efficiency. Supplementary material 10.1136/bmjph-2023-000818 online supplemental file 1 10.1136/bmjph-2023-000818 online supplemental file 2 10.1136/bmjph-2023-000818 online supplemental file 3