Introduction Large genomic cohorts such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) have been instrumental in understanding the biologic underpinnings of breast cancer subtypes. For example, samples drawn from the United States and Europe have shown that Basal-like tumors are characterized by TP53 mutation and chromosomal instability, while Luminal tumors frequently harbor mutations in PIK3CA and estrogen pathway-related genes ( 1 – 3 ). While TCGA closely reflects the age and race distribution of breast cancer cases in the United States, the low absolute number of Black and younger women limits statistical power to detect differences in lower frequency variants that may disproportionately affect these subgroups ( 4 , 5 ). Given that Black and younger women experience higher breast cancer specific mortality and recurrence ( 6 – 8 ), increasing representation of these patients in sequencing efforts is important for understanding molecular drivers of progression and prognosis. Both race and age have previously been associated with differences in tumor somatic landscapes, partially as a result of differences in subtype distribution ( 9 , 10 ). Black women, especially younger Black women ( 9 ), are more likely to have Basal-like and triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs) with concomitant higher prevalence of TP53 mutations and high genomic instability and lower prevalence of PIK3CA mutations than non-Black women ( 11 – 14 ). Similarly, younger breast cancer patients have more TP53 and GATA3 mutations and fewer CDH1 , PIK3CA , and MAP3K1 mutations than older patients ( 15 – 17 ), as well as higher levels of copy number alterations and homologous recombination deficiency ( 18 ). In addition to increasing representation of Black and younger women in genomic research, there is a growing need to understand the role of social conditions in breast cancer biology. Race is a social construct that encompasses multiple domains including cultural practices, economic standing, and exposure to racism ( 19 ). Prior analyses of somatic differences by race have been unable to incorporate these facets, in large part because most large genomic consortia lack detailed exposure data on the social dimensions of race ( 11 , 12 , 14 ). Our objectives in the current analysis were 1) to characterize differences in the somatic landscape of breast cancer in Black and younger women versus non-Black and older women using the Carolina Breast Cancer Study (CBCS), a unique cohort comprised of ~50% Black and ~50% young women and 2) to investigate possible social drivers of somatic alterations. Materials and Methods Study Populations The Carolina Breast Cancer Study, Phase 3 (CBCS3) is a population-based case-only study of breast cancer cases in 44 North Carolina counties (N = 2,998). Between 2008 and 2013, women aged 20 to 74 with a diagnosis of primary breast cancer were identified through rapid case ascertainment in collaboration with the North Carolina Central Cancer Registry. The study used a process of randomized recruitment to sample potentially eligible participants, oversampling both Black women and women under the age of 50 such that both subgroups represent 50% of the final CBCS3 population. Demographic information such as self-reported race, ethnicity, household income, education level, and screening were collected via interview, while clinical information, including tumor grade, stage, size, and nodal status, was abstracted from pathology records. Tumor receptor status was determined by immunohistochemistry, with ≥1% positivity considered ER+ and PR+, or IHC3+ considered HER2+ ( 20 ). Prior to enrollment, all study participants provided written informed consent. Study protocols adhered to U.S. Common Rule and were approved by the UNC Institutional Review Board. From the 2,998 CBCS3 participants, 398 formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) primary tumors were sampled for DNA sequencing based on availability of tumor cores. Participants who developed a second primary or local recurrence were also oversampled. Those sampled for DNA sequencing were slightly older than the full CBCS3 population (Mean = 53.2 vs 51.7 years, p = 0.01), but did not differ in distributions of ER status, stage at diagnosis, or race. Compared to 14% (N = 427/2998) of the overall CBCS3 population who developed a recurrence, 20% of the participants with DNA-sequenced primary tumors had recurrence, but the DNA sequenced population overrepresented local rather than distant recurrences and second primary breast cancers. Among selected tumors, we removed samples with 1) insufficient DNA content (N=2), 2) that generated sequencing flags or potential mislabeling as shown by GATK/Picard HsMetrics, FastQC (RRID:SCR_014583), and SMaSH ( 21 ) (N=35), and 3) with total depth/coverage AUCs in the lowest 10% (N=4), leaving 357 primary tumor samples. For comparison and pooled analyses, we also utilized DNA sequencing data from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA; RRID:SCR_003193), a collaborative study aimed at understanding the molecular determinants and characteristics of cancer. TCGA study details and rationale are available elsewhere ( 1 , 22 ). Briefly, TCGA selected large tumors that allowed for multiple technologies to be deployed on the same specimen and included tumors from several different referral sites. In later years, Black participants were oversampled, leading to a final 166 (18%) Black participants among 948 female, primary breast samples with available tumor and paired normal BAM files aligned to human reference genome 38 (GrCh38). Library Preparation For CBCS3, genomic DNA in tumor and paired blood-derived normal samples were extracted and DNA content was evaluated using Qubit fluorometry. Libraries were generated by next generation sequencing with an Agilent SureSelect custom capture bait set [UNCSeq ( 23 ) V10, encompassing ~1200 genes commonly altered in cancer] on Illumina NovaSeq6000, HiSeq4000, or NextSeq500 sequencers, depending on batch. All sequencing was performed using 2 × 75 paired-end reads and the median estimated tumor purity from Sequenza ( 24 ) was 65% (IQR = 46%, 85%). TCGA whole exome sequencing (WES) protocols have been described previously ( 1 ). To facilitate comparisons with CBCS, we sampled TCGA BAM files to the UNCSeq BED space, including off-target (non-exonic) reads for copy number calling, described in more detail below. Consistent with the original WES protocol, tumors in TCGA were sequenced at a lower depth than CBCS (Median 60X vs 400X); median estimated tumor purity was 48% (IQR = 31%, 67%). Somatic Variant Calling Single Nucleotide Variants (SNVs) We called variants in CBCS and TCGA using established pipelines from the UNC Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center Bioinformatics core. Briefly, tumor and normal FASTQs were aligned to GRCh38 using BWAmem [v0.7.17, arXiv:1303.3997] and BAM files were sorted, indexed, and marked for duplicate reads. Paired tumor and normal BAMs were realigned together with ABRA2 [v2.2.4; RRID:SCR_003277] ( 25 ), and variants were called with Mutect2 [from GATK v4.1.7.0; RRID:SCR_000559; bioRxiv 861054], Strelka2 [v2.9.10; RRID:SCR_005109] ( 26 ), and Cadabra [from ABRA2] ( 25 ). 83 primary tumors in CBCS did not have a paired normal sample available and were run through an analogous pipeline designed for variant calling in tumor-only settings (‘somatic-tumor-only’). After merging variant calls, we filtered out indels and SNVs that did not meet minimum caller quality scores (Cadabra indels: 10.8, Mutect2 indels: 7, Mutect2 SNVs : 8.4, Strelka2 Indels: 15.0, Strelka2 SNVs: 18.2), had 10% variant allele frequency (VAF), had a total read depth 15, were supported by 5 alternate reads, and, if a paired normal was available, with a depth of 5 in normal samples or a VAF 5 times as large in the tumor as in the normal. We also filtered out variants with a global minor allele frequency 5% in gnomAD (bioRxiv 2022.03.20.485034), as these may represent common germline variants inaccurately called as somatic. To determine whether variant calls from tumor samples without matched normal tissue were concordant with those from tumor samples with matched normal tissue, we estimated odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the probability of mutation to any given gene according to pipeline (tumor-only vs. tumor-normal) for CBCS samples (N = 357). All models were inverse probability weighted for age and race given minor differences in the tumor-only set (47% non-Black, 41% 50 years) versus tumor-normal (49% non-Black, 64% 50 years), and p-values were corrected for false discovery rate. Few differences were noted in the mutational landscapes called by the tumor-only pipeline versus the tumor-normal pipeline, with the most differentially mutated genes occurring in flagged regions (e.g. TTN , FLG ) that were ignored in subsequent analyses ( Supplementary Table 1 ). Copy Number Alterations We used cnvkit (27, 28; RRID:SCR_021917), a copy number calling algorithm optimized for targeted sequencing, to assess the presence of somatic copy number alterations (sCNAs). Both WES and targeted sequencing target only small portions of the genome at high depth, and the difference in read depth between tumor and normal samples in segments of these loci can be used to infer copy number. ‘Off-target’ reads mapping to genomic loci outside of the intended BED space can also be used to estimate coverage depth, and by extension copy number, at a low level across the genome, but must be collapsed into larger segments to reduce noise and ensure an adequate number of total reads per segment. First, although we sampled the BED space of TCGA samples to represent the same regions sequenced in CBCS, we defined target and off-target regions separately in each dataset to reflect the different capture kits in the two studies. We used the UNCSeq and TCGA [MC3 ( 29 )] BED files, respectively, to identify on-target loci in CBCS and TCGA; all other captured regions were considered off-target. Next, target and off-target sequencing regions in normal samples were automatically binned based on read depth, then median-centered and corrected for GC bias, sequencing accessibility, and regional coverage. Pooled study-specific reference files, representing the expected read depth at each on- and off-target bin, were created by averaging bias-corrected read depths at each bin among normal samples from either CBCS or TCGA, separately. Log2 ratios of read depth in tumors were calculated by subtracting pooled reference coverages from normalized tumor bin coverages, then bins were filtered to remove outliers and regions with low coverage. Data were segmented by circular binary segmentation ( 28 ), and segments were further filtered to those covered by greater than or equal to 15 probes. Because cnvkit uses a pooled normal reference, rather than tumor-normal pairs, tumors without a matched normal were included in copy number analyses. We excluded samples that were outliers for Tukey’s midweight variance times the total number of copy number segments, as well as samples with a median absolute deviation read depth 1 and standard deviation 2, quantities that represents the ‘noise’ of a sample (45 in CBCS and 190 in TCGA); thus, copy number analyses include 312 CBCS3 and 758 TCGA primary tumors. We called allele specific copy numbers based on log2 ratios and beta-allele frequencies for heterozygous SNPs in merged tumor and paired normal VCF files. For samples without paired normal tissue, VCFs were generated by filtering tumor BAMs to common SNP sites ( 1% minor allele frequency) listed in dbSNP (Build 151; RRID:SCR_002338). We then identified significantly recurring alterations with GISTIC 2.0 (30; RRID:SCR_000151) at a pre-specified confidence level of 95% and maximum q-value of 0.05. Segments with fewer than 5 markers were joined to the adjacent segment with the closest copy number value to reduce hypersegmentation, and absolute log ratio values for GISTIC were capped at 1.5 to minimize bias due to differential coverage. Additionally, segments with log ratio values below −9 were excluded from analyses as these likely represent areas with zero or near-zero target coverage, and significant alterations affecting only one gene from our panel were excluded due to higher variability in these regions. Arm level gains and losses were defined as changes to 80% of a chromosome arm, while gene-level amplifications and homozygous deletions were defined as +2 or −2 values in GISTIC, respectively. Socioeconomic Variables A unique feature of CBCS is availability of individual- and area-level social factor data that can be assessed in conjunction with genomics. At the individual-level, we assessed self-reported annual household income (dichotomized as $30,000 vs. ≥ $30,000), highest level of education attained ( college vs ≥ some college), marital status (unmarried vs. married), and overall individual socioeconomic status (SES) variables based on a previous latent class analysis ( 31 ). The variables included in the latent class were: self-reported household income [categorized as $15k, $15k – 50k, $≥50k], highest level of educational attainment [ College, High School or GED, High School], body mass index category [≤25, 25 – 30, ≥30], marital status [married/not married (including divorced, widowed, separated, never married)], health insurance coverage [including Medicare, private, Medicaid, or other plan], residence in a USDA-designated rural area, diabetes diagnosis, heart disease [angina or coronary heart disease] diagnosis, and smoking status [current/not currently]. As described in the initial paper, categorized factors were entered into a latent class model, varying the number of latent classes from 2 to 10 and selecting the best fit based on AIC and BIC. A two class solution (High SES vs. low SES) was found to be the best fit to the data. Area-level assets and deprivation were defined based on a separate latent class model of 15 census-tract level socioeconomic indicators from the 2010–2014 American Community Survey, and dichotomized as High/Low Assets and High/Low Deprivation ( 32 , 33 ). In addition, because healthcare access and utilization may serve as important links between SES and somatic landscape, we assessed mammography screening: women aged 45 or older reported the number of mammograms they received between age 40 and at least two years prior to diagnosis, and we used the average screening rate to dichotomize adherence as inadequate ( 0.5 per year) or as recommended (≥ 0.5 per year) according to guidelines from the U.S. Preventative Service Task Force ( 34 ) and as described previously in Dunn et al ( 35 ). Statistical Analysis CBCS vs TCGA Given disparate methods of sample preparation in the two cohorts, as well as differences in population characteristics, we evaluated comparability by estimating prevalence differences (PDs) of SNVs (to genes with 5% mutation prevalence), arm-level changes, and sCNAs by cohort. Where appropriate, we then pooled data from CBCS and TCGA to allow maximum power to detect genomic variation by race and age. PDs were estimated using generalized linear models standardized to age, race, and ER status distribution of CBCS. Standardized estimates can be interpreted as the prevalence difference that would have been observed if TCGA and CBCS had the same distribution of these population characteristics. Confidence intervals (CIs) were derived using the delta method ( 36 ). PDs near zero indicate high concordance between studies and support the use of pooling. Differences in stage between the two studies were also noted, but we found few nominally find significant associations between stage at diagnosis and mutation prevalence, none of which remained after false discovery rate correction ( Supplementary Table 2 ). We also used ComplexHeatmap ( 37 ) to visualize patterns of somatic alteration in CBCS and TCGA. Enrichment of Somatic Variants by Race and Age To determine whether there were substantial differences in the prevalence, type, and co-occurrence of somatic alterations by race, we used logistic regression to estimate PDs and 95% CIs for alterations present in at least 5% of samples within any strata of race (Black vs. non-Black) or age ( 50 years, ≥50 years). First, we fit logistic models predicting alteration status (yes/no) from race and age, then derived PDs from contrasts of estimated marginal effects. CIs were estimated based on the delta method because estimation of PDs through a binomial model with an identity link was limited by small sample sizes for rarer alterations. Investigated alterations were 1) SNVs (by gene), 2) arm-level gains and losses, and 3) recurrent sCNAs. All models adjusted for dataset (CBCS vs. TCGA), then further adjusted for PAM50 tumor subtype (Basal-like versus other) to assess whether observed associations were independent of subtype. Model equations can be expressed as: logit(Alteration) = β 0 + β 1 *Race + β 2 *Age + β 3 *Dataset + β 4 *Subtype + ε, where race, age, dataset, and subtype are binary indicator variables. 82 CBCS samples did not have PAM50 RNA data and subtype for these participants was determined using IHC surrogates, as described previously ( 20 ). We also conducted ER-stratified analyses to determine whether associations persisted across subtypes. We employed a false discovery rate (FDR) correction for multiple testing among genes mutated at 5% frequency; FDR-adjusted p-values will be denoted as ‘q-values’ throughout and confidence intervals are not adjusted for FDR. Associations with all other genes in the panel are included in Supplementary Table 3 . Different variants within the same gene can have distinct functional consequences. We categorized mutations to TP53 , PIK3CA , and GATA3 [selected a priori for based on their relative frequency of mutation and prior evidence of association with race and age ( 11 – 14 , 16 , 17 )] based on functionally-relevant gene-specific protein domains and assessed age-adjusted associations with race using multinomial logistic regression (outcome = mutation type). Because virtually all (93%) missense TP53 -mutations occurred in the DNA-binding domain, TP53 domains were categorized as Zinc-binding (including the L2 and L3 loops) versus non-Zinc binding rather than DNA-binding vs non-DNA-binding. In addition, we assessed associations between race and TP53 truncating variants, including non-missense mutations and indels in this classification. PIK3CA variants were categorized as those in the helical, kinase, or neither domain, while GATA3 variants (including splice variants) were categorized as those in the Zinc-finger 1 or 2 domains, and those in the C-terminal region. Oncogenic Pathways Because distinct alterations (i.e. in different genes) may lead to similar pathway expression consequences, we combined mutations and copy number alterations in 10 canonical cancer pathways (Cell cycle, TP53, RTK-RAS, PI3K, TGFβ, NRF2, NOTCH, Hippo, MYC, and WNT) using a previously published pathway-specific framework in TCGA ( 38 ). For genes listed in any of the 10 pathways, we extracted mutation and copy number data then defined pathway dysfunction as: “Oncogenic/Likely Oncogenic” mutations in the OncoKB database ( 39 ) or truncating mutations (for tumor suppressor genes only), homozygous deletions of tumor suppressor genes, or amplifications of oncogenes. Samples (N = 1070; the total number of TCGA and CBCS samples with both somatic mutation and copy number data) were classified as having pathway dysfunction if they displayed at least one qualifying alteration within the pathway. As for mutations and recurrent copy number alterations, we used generalized linear models to evaluate associations between pathway dysfunction (presence/absence) and race and age. Correlation of DNA and RNA-level Changes Though RNA-sequencing was not available for CBCS participants, we sought to determine if DNA-level differences were reflected at the transcriptomic level. Therefore, we assessed RNA-based TP53 dysfunction ( 40 ) for the 216 CBCS and 945 TCGA samples with available RNA data ( 41 ). The RNA-based signature measures pathway-level dysfunction in TP53 and its downstream targets, assigning continuous correlation-to-centroids for “mutant-like” vs. “wild-type like” samples and a binary classification depending on which correlation is stronger. We cross-tabulated binarized RNA-based classifications with observed TP53 mutation status and DNA-based pathway alterations to determine the extent of overlap. Analysis of Social/Genomic Associations To explore associations between socioeconomic factors and genomic alterations, we conducted analyses within CBCS alone (because TCGA does not include socioeconomic variables), and estimated PDs and 95% CIs for associations between mutations, recurrent copy number alterations, and DNA-based pathway defects and socioeconomic correlates of race: income, educational attainment, as-recommended adherence to mammography (in women older than 45 only), individual socioeconomic latent class [iSES] ( 31 ), area-level deprivation and assets ( 32 ). We stratified these analyses by self-reported race because race-adjusted estimates cannot capture potential meaningful effect measure modification and are difficult to interpret ( 42 ). We used stabilized inverse probability weighting to adjust estimates for age [in race models] or race [in age models] and subtype. First, we regressed the social variable of interest on age ( 50 years vs ≥ 50 years)/race (Black vs non-Black) and subtype using logistic regression: logit(Social Exposure) = β 0 + β 1 *Subtype + β 2 *Age/Race + ε, then used this model to derive each participant’s predicted probability of social exposure (denominator of weights). We also predicted social exposure using an intercept only model (numerator of weights): logit(Social Exposure) = β 0 . Inverse probability weights were calculated as either numerator/denominator [if the participant had the social exposure] or (1-numerator)/(1-denominator) [if the participant did not have the social exposure]. Next, we regressed the genomic alteration on social exposure in a linear binomial model, weighting by inverse probability weights: P(Alteration) = β 0 + β 1 *Social. One participant was missing data on education, 20 were missing data on screening, and 29 were missing data on income; social characteristics for these participants was imputed using multiple imputation by chained equations ( 43 ). While we noted that more younger than older women were high SES, these differences were not modified by race with younger women in either strata of race having approximately 20% higher prevalence of high SES. Alpha was set at 0.05 throughout, and the FDR threshold was 10%. Data Availability TCGA clinical data and publicly available variant calls and RNA-sequencing are available through the GDC Data Portal at https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/ . Sequencing data for TCGA (phs000178.v11.p8) and CBCS (phs003725.v1) are available through the NCBI dbGaP ( https://dbgap.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ ). RESULTS CBCS and TCGA Somatic Alterations To increase our power to detect significant variants enriched among Black and young women, we pooled DNA sequencing data from the population-based CBCS with extant data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). In total, 357 primary tumors were sequenced in CBCS3 and 948 in TCGA ( Table 1 ) resulting in a total sample of 1305, with 26% non-Hispanic Black and 33% younger women (i.e. 50). CBCS included a significantly higher proportion of Black and young women than TCGA (both p 0.001). Pooling the two datasets more than doubled the number of Black women, as well as increased the representative of women under age 50 by 64%, Basal-like tumors by 52%, and Stage I tumors by 81% relative to TCGA data alone. Before pooling the datasets, we confirmed that similar somatic alterations were present in each. In both CBCS and TCGA, we observed a median of 6 mutations per sample among the 1200 targeted genes (CBCS IQR = 4–9, TCGA IQR = 4–11). As shown in Figure 1 , 9 genes ( TP53 , PIK3CA , CDH1 , GATA3 , KMT2C , MAP3K1 , PTEN , DDR2 , ARID1A , and CBFB ) were mutated in 5% of samples from both datasets. Patterns of co-occurring mutations were consistent across studies, with TP53 mutant tumors often carrying few other common mutations and about half of PIK3CA mutants harboring co-occurrent CDH1 , GATA3 , or MAP3K1 mutations ( Figure 1A , Figure 1C ). More tumors in TCGA than CBCS had both TP53 and PIK3CA mutations (8% vs 5%), but this difference was not statistically significant (p = 0.15). Moreover, the prevalence of mutation to any given gene differed by no more than 5% between the two datasets, and after standardizing for background differences in age, race, and ER status, the only significant differences were higher CBFB and ARID1A mutation prevalence in CBCS ( CBFB PD = 4%, 95% CI = 2%, 7%; ARID1A PD = 3%, 95% CI = 1%, 6%; Table 2 ). While CBCS and TCGA showed similar copy number profiles ( Figure 1B and 1D ), including recurrent amplifications in 1q, 3q, 8q, and 17q arms and deletions in 1p, 8p, and 11q, the smaller sample size and higher sequencing depth in CBCS led to greater variability and a more peaked appearance in GISTIC plots. Despite this qualitative difference, prevalences of arm-level alterations were similar between cohorts ( Supplementary Table 4 ). For most focal alterations, including amplification of 8q23.3 ( MYC ) and deletion of 17p13.1 ( TP53 ), CBCS had higher prevalence than TCGA, though prevalence differences were generally within 10% ( Table 2 ). Notable exceptions were enrichments of 9q34.3 (13%, 95% CI= 8%, 18%), and deletions of 11p15.5 (14%, 95% CI= 8%, 20%) in CBCS. Differences in Somatic Variants by Race and Age Given the high concordance in somatic alterations across both datasets, we pooled CBCS and TCGA to investigate alterations by race (Black vs. non-Black) and age. 102 participants who were non-Black and non-white were included with non-Hispanic white participants in the ‘non-Black’ group because these participants donated genomic material and add important richness to our dataset. Unless otherwise noted, differences by binarized race were concordant with those comparing non-Hispanic white (NHW) and non-Hispanic Black (NHB) individuals. Adjusting for age and subtype, among genes mutated at 5% frequency, Black women were significantly more likely to have FAT1 mutations (PD = 4%, 95% CI = 0%, 8%), and less likely to have PIK3CA (PD = −10%, 95% CI = −16%, −4%) and DDR2 (PD = −5%, 95% CI = −8%, −2%) mutations than non-Black women, all of which remained associated after FDR correction ( Figure 2A ). Restricting to NHW and NHB women, associations with TP53 were also significant. Adjusting for race and subtype, younger women ( 50 years at diagnosis) were significantly more likely to have GATA3 mutations and less likely to have KMT2C , PTEN , MAP3K1 , and CDH1 alterations, all of which remained associated after FDR correction ( Figure 2B ). Among NHW and NHB women, only MAP3K1 and GATA3 were associated with age after FDR correction and subtype adjustment. We did not find evidence of a significant interaction between age and race for any variant. Individual associations between race, age, and somatic variants for all genes, including those mutated at 5% frequency, are listed in Supplementary Table 3 . In follow-up ER-stratified analyses, we noted higher prevalence of TP53 mutations and lower prevalence of PIK3CA mutations in Black women with both ER+ and ER- tumors, though associations were generally only significant among the ER+ stratum ( Supplementary Table 5 ). In contrast, enrichment for GATA3 mutations among younger women was observed only among ER+ tumors whereas disenrichment for PIK3CA was restricted to ER- tumors ( Supplementary Table 5 ). Adjusting for age, the enrichment for TP53 mutations in Black women was observed for both truncating (OR = 2.13, 95% CI = 1.51, 3.02) and non-truncating variants (OR = 1.82, 95% CI = 1.34, 2.46) while the lower prevalence of PIK3CA alterations in Black women was observed across all protein domains ( Table 3 ). Black women had fewer alterations in the Zinc-Finger 1 and 2 repeats, but similar prevalence of alterations in the C-terminal region of GATA3 than non-Black women, suggesting differences in the distribution of locus-specific alterations by race (interaction p-value = 0.17). Adjusting for race, younger women had similar types of TP53 and PIK3CA alterations as older women (all p 0.05; Table 3 ). Enrichment of GATA3 alterations in young women was significant for the Zinc-Finger 1 and 2 domains but not the C-terminal region, though the interaction was not significant (p = 0.5). Differences in Copy Number and Aneuploidy by Race and Age As shown in Figure 2C , 8q23.3 amplifications (PD = 10%, 95% CI = 3%, 17%), 17q11.2 amplifications (PD = 6%, 95% CI = 0%, 12%) and 17p13.1 deletions (PD = 8%, 95% CI = 2%, 15%) were more prevalent among Black women, while 7p22.1 deletion was less prevalent (PD = −4%, 95% CI = −8%, 0%).No alterations were significant after FDR correction. Younger women had nominally more 17q21.3 deletions (PD = 5%, 95% CI = 0%, 9%) and fewer 8p11.23 deletions (PD = −6%, 95% CI = −11%, 0%), but these differences were not significant after FDR correction ( Figure 2D ). ER-stratified analyses suggested that associations of race with 8q23.3 amplification occurred in both ER+ and ER- samples, but differences were only significant among ER+ samples; 17q11.2 amplification and 17p13.1 deletion were more common among ER- Black women only ( Supplementary Table 3 ). Significant associations between age and 8q23.3 amplifications were observed among ER- samples. Across nearly every chromosome arm, Black women were nominally more likely to experience an alteration than non-Black women, with most of these differences remaining significant after FDR correction ( Figure 3 ). Adjusting for subtype and age, Black women had more 2q, 3p, 3q, 7q, 8q, and 21q gains and 8p, 11p, 11q, 19p, and 19q deletions (FDR 0.1). Estimates were of similar magnitude when adjusting for TP53 mutation status rather than subtype ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). Comparing NHB to NHW women, NHW women also had more 18p amplifications but not significant differences in 7q and 8q amplifications. Black women also had higher overall levels of aneuploidy (median 11 altered arms) than non-Black women (median 8 altered arms, p 0.001), and this difference persisted after adjusting for subtype and after adjusting for TP53 mutation status. Accounting for race, younger women had nominally more 3q amplifications and fewer 1p, 18q, 18p, and 7q deletions, but no other significant differences were noted, and none remained after FDR correction ( Supplementary Figure 2 ). Oncogenic Pathways Because different alterations to a given gene or genes in a single biologic pathway may have similar consequences, we combined copy number and SNV data to investigate pathway-level dysfunction. Genes were grouped by mechanistic pathway, with dysfunction defined as amplification of an oncogene, specific oncogene variant, homozygous deletion of a tumor suppressor gene, or loss-of-function variant to a tumor suppressor gene in that pathway. The most frequently altered pathways in our sample were MYC (67%), PI3Kinase (51%), TP53 (48%), and RTK-RAS (38%). Subtype was strongly related to the suite of altered pathways in a sample, with Basal-like tumors having the most MYC and TP53 dysfunction, Luminal A tumors the most PI3Kinase dysfunction, and Her2-enriched tumors the most RTK-RAS dysfunction ( Supplementary Figure 3 ). As shown in Supplementary Figure 4 , after accounting for age, Black women had a significantly higher probability of MYC (79% vs 62%, PD = 16%, 95% CI = 9%, 23%) and TP53 (58% vs 44%, PD = 13%, 95% CI = 6%, 20%) pathway dysfunction than non-Black women, and a lower probability of PI3Kinase dysfunction (44% vs 54%, PD = −12%, 95% CI = −19%, −5%). Associations for MYC and PI3Kinase remained significant after adjustment for subtype (q 0.1), while that for TP53 was diminished (q = 0.15). In models comparing NHW to NHB women, however, associations with TP53 dysfunction remained significant (q = 0.07). After accounting for race, younger women had a higher probability of MYC (73% vs 63%, PD = 8%, 1%, 15%) and TP53 (53% vs 46%, PD = 7%, 0%, 13%) dysfunction, though these differences were not significant after adjustment for subtype. Correlation of DNA and RNA-level Changes In CBCS and TCGA, 542 (46%) tumors were TP53 mutant-like by RNA expression. Of the 542 RNA-predicted TP53 mutant-like tumors, 334 (62%) had a mutation; of the 619 wild-type-like samples, 567 (92%) did not have a mutation. Similarly, 70% of RNA-based mutant-like samples showed DNA-based pathway defect compared to 30% of wild-type-like samples ( Supplementary Table 6 ).. These results confirm that DNA-level changes are reflected in gene expression. Differences in Somatic Alterations by Social Exposures Black and older women in CBCS were more likely to experience low SES than non-Black and younger women ( Figure 4 ). Figure 4 shows associations between individual SES latent class and DNA-based pathway defects by self-reported race or age group. Several significant associations were observed in race-stratified analyses. Among NHB women, low individual SES was associated with significantly lower prevalence of RTK-RAS, TP53, and MYC pathway alterations and non-significantly fewer PI3Kinase alterations ( Figure 4C ). While SES association trends for MYC and PI3Kinase were in the same direction among NHW women, none of these associations were statistically significant. However, low SES NHW women had a 20% lower prevalence of HIPPO pathway alterations than high SES non-Black women (95% CI = −34%, −7%), nearly all of which resulted from homozygous deletions of FAT1 . Among younger women, low SES was associated with non-significantly fewer MYC, PI3Kinase, and RTK-RAS pathway alterations. SES showed largely null associations with pathway defects among older women, although fewer low SES older women displayed PI3Kinase alterations ( Figure 4D ). Supplementary Table 7 lists the prevalences and PDs for each socioeconomic variable/somatic alteration. DISCUSSION In this pooled analysis that substantially increased DNA-sequencing data for breast tumors from Black and younger women, we found substantial differences in somatic alterations by race and age. Black women harbored more tumor suppressor mutations ( TP53 , FAT1 ), broad chromosomal instability, and alterations to the TP53, RTK-RAS, and MYC pathways than non-Black women, but fewer PIK3CA and CDH1 mutations or PI3Kinase pathway alterations. These differences were not fully explained by the well-established enrichment of Basal-like tumors among Black women ( 9 , 10 ), suggesting that associations persist even in lower-risk tumor subtypes. Young women had more GATA3 mutations and fewer CDH1 , PIK3CA , PTEN , and KMT2C mutations, but few differences in copy number landscape relative to older women. These findings are largely consistent with previous research ( Table 4 ), with the additional strength of demonstrating that race and age associations are not fully accounted for by subtype. In addition, we identified several associations between socioeconomic variables and somatic alterations, thereby laying the foundation for future work to understand the mechanisms linking social conditions and somatic tumor biology. Ensuring representative participation in sequencing studies is crucial for generalizability of genomic insights about etiology and progression. Most prior studies have relied on samples of convenience, rather than population-based samples when assessing common somatic alterations. While convenience samples like TCGA offered substantial insights, it is important to augment these with studies that interrogate somatic mutation prevalence in more diverse populations. For instance, we found that 44% of Black women had a TP53 somatic mutation, which is consistent with previous reports from both TCGA and Europe ( 1 , 3 ) but substantially lower than estimates from cohorts such as AACR Genie [61%] ( 44 ) or the Tempus Labs Database [59%] ( 45 ). Both of these latter datasets draw from tumors sent for clinical sequencing, and may overrepresent aggressive and metastatic cases relative to the general breast cancer population (e.g. over 80% of participants in Tempus are Stage IV), which may explain the relatively higher rate of TP53 mutations. Comparisons of datasets with different recruitment strategies may also implicate the defects associated with those differences [e.g. TP53 is associated with metastatic disease in ER+ tumors ( 46 , 47 )]. Overall, these differences underscore the importance of population-based sequencing as a comparison for other contexts, even with limited sample sizes and smaller targeted panels. Both of the two most commonly mutated genes in breast cancer, TP53 and PIK3CA , showed different alteration prevalence by race. Differential enrichment of these mutations implies distinct etiologic pathways in Black women, as also articulated in previous epidemiologic studies of subtype ( 48 , 49 ). Recently, the combination of ER [which is strongly correlated with PIK3CA ( 2 )] and P53 has been shown to offer a strong measure of etiologic heterogeneity, or the extent to which subtype reflects distinct etiologic processes ( 50 , 51 ). Thus, differential PIK3CA / TP53 mutation status may reflect underlying population heterogeneity in risk factors such as BMI, parity, and oral contraceptive use. Within CBCS, Black women are more likely to have high BMI and younger age at first birth than non-Black women, and less likely to have previously used oral contraceptives ( 52 ), all of which may be reflected in TP53 / PIK3CA mutational spectra. However, it is noteworthy that the association between race and enrichment of TP53 mutations persists across multiple cancer types ( 14 ), suggesting the possibility for social stress-related mechanisms of alteration. There is biologic plausibility for an effect of stress on mutation spectra. While we caution that in vivo models cannot replicate human social stressors, these models have shown that chronic stress, through induction of inflammation and glucocorticoids, decrease levels of P53 (the protein product of TP53 ), leading to increased tumorigenesis and growth ( 53 ). In a sample of Black young adults (age 18–29) without cancer, exposure to racial discrimination negatively predicted TP53 expression and was mediated by high levels of inflammation ( 54 ); protective factors reduced this association. It remains unclear how TP53 mutation and DNA-based pathway dysfunction relate to these downstream biologic effects in the context of the social construct of race. We found that women diagnosed prior to age 50 had more GATA3 mutations than older women, consistent with prior studies using younger age cutoffs [see Table 4 ] ( 16 , 17 , 55 ). This mutational enrichment occurred across both the Zinc-Finger 1 and 2 and C-terminal coding regions, including the X308_Splice hotspot. The significance of GATA3 mutations in younger breast cancer patients is unknown, as emerging evidence suggests diverse effects depending on estrogen and progesterone expression, as well as occurrence pre vs post-menopausally ( 56 , 57 ). While others have showed similar associations between age and CDH1 , PIK3CA , and MAP3K1 mutation ( 16 , 18 , 55 ), our results add value by suggesting these differences are not fully explained by subtype or race. Several novel associations between race, age, and somatic alterations were identified which require validation in further studies. These include enrichment for FAT1 mutations and 3q26 amplifications among Black women, and enrichment for PTEN mutations among older women. FAT1 is a gene in the Hippo pathway that may contribute to CDK4/6 resistance in metastatic settings ( 58 ), while the 3q26 amplicon includes multiple genes involved in the coordination of cellular proliferation and survival ( 59 ). PTEN loss and inactivation are common mechanisms of AKT/PI3Kinase activation ( 60 ), and could contribute to analogous pathway dysfunction among older women. Our work builds on prior studies [see Table 4 ] ( 11 – 13 , 61 – 64 ) analyzing somatic differences between Black and non-Black breast cancer participants through the addition of socioeconomic data. TP53, MYC, and RTK-RAS pathway alterations showed consistent inverse associations with SES among Black women but had null relationships with SES in non-Black women. The fact that these hallmarks of ER-/HER2+ and Basal-like disease ( 1 , 2 ) were less common in Black women of low SES, regardless of how the construct of SES was measured, underscores the complexity of the interactions between ancestry and social factors ( 65 – 67 ). We were underpowered to detect significant socioeconomic associations after race stratification, but our results and the distinct patterns observed by race do highlight the importance of investigating how social factors impact tumor biology. However, there is a dearth of data and analyses evaluating socioeconomic deprivation in relation to specific somatic alterations in breast cancer. One prior analysis (n=191 tumors from African American, European American, and Kenyan participants) investigated neighborhood deprivation index and somatic mutations and found that high deprivation was associated with increased likelihood of TP53 mutations and decreased likelihood of TBX3 mutations ( 68 ), but the analysis did not stratify by or adjust for self-reported race, leaving the potential for confounding by race and/or ancestry. Contrary to our findings, Baker and colleagues also reported positive associations between TP53 mutation and low socioeconomic status ( 69 ). These conflicting results may be due to differences in the operationalization of SES between studies: Baker and colleagues defined low SES based on the highest decile of zip code-level deprivation, while our area-level measure of SES was defined based on a latent class at the census-tract level. As a result, substantially more women are categorized as low SES in our study (40–60%, depending on variable) than in Baker (10%), and it may be that residual heterogeneity within our low-SES defined group masked mutational differences. In summary, socioeconomics seems to play a modifying role in observed associations between race and somatic alterations, but further studies with larger populations of Black women are needed to disentangle ancestry and socioeconomics. The strengths of our study include the harmonization of data from TCGA and CBCS which permitted pooling to increase power to detect differences by race and age, the leveraging of the unique sampling of CBCS which substantially increased the number of Black and young women sequenced and allowed us to control for age and race simultaneously, and the integration of social variables into genomic analyses about race. Nonetheless, some additional technical limitations should be noted. First, DNA from tumors in CBCS was extracted from FFPE tissue, which is known to increase the likelihood of sequencing artifacts, especially C T mutations ( 70 ). Although we were rigorous in our filtering of mutations and copy number changes, it is possible that some alterations detected were false positives. The expected number of false positive calls is small given that observed prevalences were similar to those from fresh-frozen samples in TCGA. Second, because our sample included over-representation of primary tumors in CBCS from women who developed secondary cancers or recurrences, the somatic landscape of these tumors may differ slightly from CBCS as a whole. However, the distributions of race, age group, subtype, and stage in sequenced tumors herein were similar to the overall CBCS study population. Third, ancestry estimates were only available for a subset of CBCS participants with DNA sequencing data (N = 114), so we could not control for ancestry in our analyses. Additionally, previous CBCS analyses report high concordance between ancestry and self-reported race (i.e. 91% of self-reported Black participants had 70% African Ancestry, further limiting the potential to decompose effects of ancestry versus social conditions ( 71 ). Despite these limitations, our analysis represents an important step in collecting joint social and biologic data to facilitate understanding of the mechanisms by which social conditions contribute to tumor biology. Supplementary Material 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11