Introduction Breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer among women in the US.( 1 ) Due to the high burden of breast cancer,( 2 – 4 ) a preventative approach is imperative. Cancer prevention guidelines recommend engaging in healthy lifestyle behaviors to reduce cancer risk.( 5 , 6 ) In 2020, the American Cancer Society expanded on existing cancer prevention guidelines, recommending that people “limit sedentary behaviors” due to emerging evidence linking sedentary behaviors with adverse health outcomes, including cancer.( 5 ) Sedentary time, defined as the time spent in any waking behavior characterized by an energy expenditure ≤1.5 metabolic equivalents (METs), while in a sitting, reclining or lying posture, is a distinct health behavior independent of physical activity.( 7 ) Self-reported sedentary time has increased in the past decade among adults in the US and accounts for a large portion of waking behavior.( 8 , 9 ) Sedentary time has been shown to be associated with increased metabolic dysfunction, adiposity, and pro-inflammatory hormones, which are known risk factors of postmenopausal breast cancer and overall breast cancer, respectively.( 10 , 11 ) Moreover, a 2022 umbrella review of 10 meta-analyses found self-reported sedentary time to be positively associated with breast cancer risk.( 12 ) Despite the volume of research investigating the relationship of sedentary time and breast cancer risk, few studies have investigated how this relationship varies by menopausal status.( 13 – 15 ) Three studies investigated the relationship of time spent sitting with breast cancer incidence stratified by menopausal status and reported contrasting results.( 13 – 15 ) While Catsburg et al.( 13 ) reported no association (overall or by menopausal status), Nomura et al.( 14 ) and Tomida et al.( 15 ) reported a positive association between sedentary time and pre- and postmenopausal breast cancer risk. Previous research investigating the relationship of body mass index (BMI) and breast cancer risk by menopausal status has found a positive relationship between BMI and postmenopausal breast cancer risk and an inverse relationship between BMI and premenopausal breast cancer.( 11 ) Given that sedentary time and BMI may be related,( 16 , 17 ) stratifying by menopausal status is crucial for developing appropriate cancer prevention guidelines for women at risk of breast cancer. To build upon existing research, we investigated the relationship of sedentary time and breast cancer risk overall and stratified by menopausal status, and considered etiologic heterogeneity by tumor subtype, among women participating in the Sister Study cohort. Materials and Methods Study Design The Sister Study enrolled 50,884 women aged 35–74 years with the primary goal of studying the effects of environmental and lifestyle factors on breast cancer.( 18 ) Women from all 50 states and Puerto Rico enrolled from 2003 to 2009. To be eligible, women must have had a sister diagnosed with breast cancer but no prior breast cancer diagnosis themselves. At baseline, women completed a comprehensive questionnaire to provide information on demographic, lifestyle, reproductive, environmental, medical, and family factors. Women completed annual health updates and every 2–3 years they completed extensive follow-up questionnaires. Response rates through the first detailed follow-up were high ( 90%).( 18 ) The Sister Study was approved and is overseen by the institutional review board of the National Institutes of Health and in accordance with the US Common Rule. All participants provided written informed consent. We utilized data through September 2021 from the Sister Study Data Release 11.1. Sedentary time At the first detailed follow-up (2008–2012) participants were asked to report their average sedentary time. Participants were asked “During the past 7 days, how much time did you usually spend sitting on a weekday? This includes sitting while at work, at home, while doing course work and during leisure time. This may include sedentary time at a desk, visiting friends, reading or sitting or lying down to watch television.” Participants then reported their sedentary time in hours and minutes. Responses were aggregated into the following categories: ≤ 5 hours/day (referent), 6–9 hours/day, and ≥ 10 hours/day. We will refer to this construct as sedentary time per the definition outlined by the Sedentary Behavior Research Network.( 7 ) Breast cancer diagnosis Breast cancer diagnosis was self-reported. If a participant reported a new breast cancer diagnosis, Sister Study staff requested additional information regarding their diagnosis and treatment, as well as permission to obtain medical records, which were used to collect pathological data on tumor characteristics. Medical records were obtained for 82.3% of participants with breast cancer diagnoses and agreement between self-reported diagnosis and medical records was high (positive predictive value 98%).( 19 , 20 ) Therefore, self-reported diagnosis was used if medical records were not available. Covariates Race/ethnicity, attained education, and age at menarche were collected at baseline. Age (continuous), self-reported BMI, menopausal status, smoking status, drinking status, physical activity metabolic-equivalent (MET) hours per week (continuous), parity, and mammography completion in the prior 2 years were collected at baseline and updated at the time that sedentary time was collected on the first detailed follow-up. BMI (kg/m 2 ) was derived from self-reported height and weight measurements. Due to the relatively small sample of participants with a BMI of 18.5 kg/m 2 , we combined this category with 18.5–24.9 kg/m 2 and will refer to it as normal weight. Physical activity was converted to MET hours/week to incorporate the intensity and duration of the self-reported usual activity levels. Menopausal status at the first detailed follow-up was used to describe the study population and menopausal status was treated as a time-dependent covariate in the event-time statistical models and based on status at diagnosis in the case-only models for etiologic heterogeneity. Covariate categories are presented in Table 1 . Analytical sample Of the 48,131 Sister Study participants who completed the first detailed follow-up, 5 withdrew their data from the study and therefore were not included in this analysis. Women were excluded from our analysis if they were diagnosed with breast cancer before the first detailed follow-up (n=977), diagnosed with breast cancer within 1 year of completing the first detailed follow-up questionnaire (n=283), timing of cancer diagnosis or diagnosis status was unknown (n=18), had no follow-up time after first detailed follow-up (n=197), were missing information on other covariates (n=486), or were missing information on sedentary time (n=7,054). Statistical methods Characteristics of the study population were described by sedentary time categories. Cox proportional hazards regression models with age as the time scale were used to model the hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the association between sedentary time and breast cancer risk. Person-years began accruing at the age the participant completed the first detailed follow-up questionnaire and continued until age at breast cancer diagnosis, age at death, or age at last study contact (lost to follow-up or administrative censoring in September 2021). We also estimated the cumulative risk of breast cancer by age 70 years and assessed differences in absolute risk among the categories of sedentary time (6–9 hours/day vs. ≤5 hours/day and ≥10 hours/day vs. ≤5 hours/day) using the Breslow method.( 21 ) For this study, first the detailed follow-up questionnaire will serve as baseline. Primary models included all breast cancer diagnosis (invasive and DCIS) as an event. We conducted stratified analyses by cancer type (i.e., invasive and DCIS). Participants were right censored in the stratified analyses if they developed the event that wasn’t of interest in the specific analysis. To assess if the association of sedentary time and breast cancer risk was modified by menopausal status at the time of diagnosis, we generated an interaction term to test for heterogeneity. Results from this test are presented using p-heterogeneity and strata-specific HR estimates are presented. The analogous interaction assessment was done for race/ethnicity. We conducted a case-only analysis to explore etiologic heterogeneity in the relationship between sedentary time and the estrogen receptor (ER) status of the breast tumor.( 22 , 23 ) The case-only analysis used unconditional logistic regression, treating the odds of ER- breast cancer as the index and ER+ breast cancer as the referent, with cubic-spline adjustment for age at diagnosis, and BMI, and additional adjustment for parity, age at first birth, and menopausal status at breast cancer diagnosis. All models were adjusted for confounders selected a priori using directed acyclic graphs.( 24 ) Multivariable models included race/ethnicity, education, BMI cubic splines, an interaction term between BMI and menopausal status, physical activity (MET hours/week), and parity. Cubic splines for BMI were used to model the suspected non-linear association between BMI and sedentary time and BMI and breast cancer risk. For case-only analyses, we included menopausal status at breast cancer diagnosis in adjusted models. We conducted several sensitivity analyses. First, we used multiple imputation to impute missing sedentary time values for participants who completed the first detailed follow-up questionnaire, assuming a missing at random pattern. We used multiple imputation by chained equations and variables to create the imputation model included age, cumulative hazard, event indicator, race/ethnicity, education, continuous BMI, menopausal status at first detailed follow-up, parity, and physical activity (MET hours/week). We used Proc MI in SAS to create 10 imputed datasets. The 10 imputed datasets were then used to compute and combine the estimates into an overall estimate and variance–covariance matrix using Rubin’s rules.( 25 ) After imputation, we then repeated Cox proportional hazards regression models for sedentary time and overall breast cancer risk and stratified by menopausal status. We also investigated the association of sedentary time and overall breast cancer risk stratified by BMI categories and MET hours/week of physical activity quartiles, respectively. The stratified analyses were completed in the overall cohort and among pre- and postmenopausal women separately. Analyses were performed in SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC) (Statistical Analysis System, RRID:SCR_008567). Data availability: De-identified data used in this analysis and other Sister Study data may be requested following procedures described in the study website: https://sisterstudy.niehs.nih.gov/English/collaboration.htm Results During follow up, there were 2,755 breast cancer events (324 premenopausal events and 2,431 postmenopausal events) among the 39,111 women included. Median follow-up time was 10.8 years, and a total of 401,018 person-years were included. Characteristics of the study cohort stratified by sedentary time are presented in Table 1 . Forty-four percent of the study sample reported ≤5 hours of sedentary time, 36% reported 6–9 hours, and 20% reported ≥10 hours. Compared to sitting ≤5 hours, sitting 6–9 hours (aHR=1.18; 95% CI: 1.08, 1.28) and ≥10 hours (aHR=1.19; 95% CI: 1.07, 1.32) were associated with higher incidence of breast cancer ( Table 2 ). The adjusted risk difference for sitting 6–9 hours vs. ≤5 hours was 2.17% (95% CI: 1.02, 3.31), and 2.29% (95% CI: 0.86, 3.71) for ≥10 hours vs. ≤5 hours. However, associations differed significantly by menopause status, with an inverse association between sitting time and premenopausal breast cancer and a positive association among postmenopausal women (p-heterogeneity=0.002). Results from the analyses stratified by menopausal status at time of diagnosis show an inverse association of sitting ≥10 hours (aHR=0.69; 95% CI: 0.50, 0.95) compared to sitting ≤5 hours for premenopausal breast cancer and an adjusted risk difference of −2.66% (95% CI: −4.92, −0.39) ( Table 2 ). Conversely, sitting 6–9 hours and ≥10 hours showed a 22% (95% CI: 1.11, 1.33) and 28% (95% CI: 1.14, 1.43) higher postmenopausal breast cancer incidence compared to sitting ≤5 hours. The adjusted risk difference was 2.21% (95% CI: 1.12, 3.31), and 2.84% (95% CI: 1.46, 4.22), respectively ( Table 2 ). Sitting 6–9 hours (aHR=1.21; 95% CI: 1.09, 1.33) and ≥10 hours (aHR=1.22; 95% CI: 1.09, 1.38) compared to ≤5 hours was associated with higher incidence of invasive breast cancer in the overall cohort, but after further stratification by menopausal status, this increase was only apparent among postmenopausal women ( Table 3 ). Sedentary time was not associated with DCIS among pre- or postmenopausal women ( Table 3 ). Results did not differ by race/ethnicity (p-heterogeneity=0.866) ( Supplemental Table 1 ). Further, among the participants who developed breast cancer during follow-up, we observed that cases who reported 10 hours a day of sedentary time, were at increased odds for ER- tumors. This association did not reach statistical significance ( Table 4 ). Results from the sensitivity analysis using multiple imputation were consistent with the primary analysis. Approximately 15% of participants with information at the study baseline were missing data on sedentary time ( Table 1 ). In the multiple imputation models, sitting 6–9 hours (aHR=1.15; 95% CI: 1.05, 1.25) and ≥10 hours (aHR=1.18; 95% CI: 1.07, 1.30) were associated with an increased incidence of breast cancer compared to sitting ≤5 hours ( Supplemental Table 2 ). After multiple imputation, the association of increased sedentary time and breast cancer risk was similarly lower for premenopausal breast cancer (≥10 hours aHR=0.72; 95% CI: 0.52, 0.99) and higher for postmenopausal breast cancer (6–9 hours aHR=1.18; 95% CI: 1.08, 1.29; ≥10 hours aHR=1.26; 95% CI: 1.13, 1.40) ( Supplemental Table 2 ). In the sensitivity analyses stratifying by BMI category, increased sedentary time was marginally associated with higher breast cancer risk in the overall cohort among normal weight and overweight women (p-trend 0.022 and 0.004, respectively). However, the p-heterogeneity showed no statistically significant difference between BMI groups (p-heterogeneity=0.693) ( Supplemental Table 3 ). After further stratifying by menopausal status, results stratified by BMI category largely followed similar patterns seen in primary analyses; we observed non-significant inverse associations between sedentary time and premenopausal breast cancer incidence in all BMI categories and several statistically significant positive associations between sedentary time and postmenopausal breast cancer incidence in all BMI categories ( Supplemental Table 3 ). In sensitivity analyses stratified by MET hour/day of physical activity quartiles, we found no evidence of heterogeneity by MET hour/day of physical activity quartile (p-heterogeneity=0.431) ( Supplemental Table 4 ). Discussion Results from this large prospective cohort of women with a first-degree family history of breast cancer showed that sedentary time was positively associated with incidence of DCIS and invasive breast cancer combined, and invasive breast cancer alone. However, sedentary time was positively associated with postmenopausal breast cancer, and inversely associated with premenopausal breast cancer. Case-only analyses indicated that the association of sedentary time and breast cancer did not vary significantly by ER status. Our findings support previous studies suggesting that increased sedentary behavior is associated with higher breast cancer incidence.( 12 , 14 , 15 , 26 ) While some studies have investigated only leisure( 27 , 28 ) or occupational( 29 ) sedentary time, we included sedentary time across all activities. Nomura et al. also included both leisure and occupational sedentary time and found that among African-American women between the ages of 21–69 years, ≥10 hours compared to 5 hours per day of sedentary time was associated with a 27% higher risk of breast cancer (95% CI: 1.06, 1.53).( 14 ) Similarly, Tomida et al. found that daily sedentary time of ≥7 hours, compared to 7 hours, was associated with higher risk of breast cancer among 36,000 Japanese women aged 55 years old (SD=9 years), on average (HR=1.36; 95% CI: 1.07, 1.71).( 15 ) A 2022 umbrella review of 29 studies (15 cohort, 14 case-control) investigating “any sedentary behavior” (leisure and/or occupational) found evidence for the positive association of sedentary time and breast cancer risk (RR=1.08; 95% CI: 1.04, 1.12).( 12 ) Unlike many previous studies, our study sample included both pre- and postmenopausal women and provided the opportunity to investigate differences by menopausal status. We found that increased sedentary time was inversely associated with premenopausal breast cancer and positively associated with postmenopausal breast cancer, and these associations were consistent when we examined invasive breast cancer and DCIS combined or invasive breast cancer alone. Current literature reporting on the association of sedentary time and breast cancer risk by menopausal status shows mixed results.( 11 ) In a 2019 meta-analysis, Chan et al. found that increased sedentary time was associated with a higher risk of postmenopausal breast cancer (RR=1.20; 95% CI: 1.00, 1.44) but no association was observed for premenopausal breast cancer (RR=1.04; 95% CI: 0.83, 1.32).( 11 ) However, this meta-analysis included only two studies that stratified by menopausal status,( 13 , 14 ) while all other included studies included only pre- or postmenopausal women.( 11 ) In contrast, a 2021 meta-analysis reported no associations for occupational sedentary time and breast cancer risk stratified by pre- (RR=1.10; 95% CI: 0.97, 1.25) and post-menopausal status (RR=1.11; 95% CI: 0.97, 1.26).( 26 ) Our finding of contrasting associations between sedentary time and breast cancer by menopausal status follow a similar pattern to what has been previously reported for the association of BMI and pre- and postmenopausal breast cancer risk.( 11 ) Given the previously established association of sedentary time and BMI,( 30 ) we adjusted all multivariable models for cubic splines of BMI and for factors that may influence BMI (e.g., physical activity), yet the associations persisted. Additionally, we completed several sensitivity analyses to investigate further, including stratifying by categories of BMI and physical activity quartiles. Results from the sensitivity analyses stratified by BMI category showed that, generally, increased sedentary time was associated with a higher rates of breast cancer in all BMI categories among postmenopausal but not premenopausal women. However, the number of premenopausal breast cancer cases was relatively small, so further investigation is needed to better elucidate these potential relationships. Previous studies have shown no clear pattern of the association of sedentary time and breast cancer risk by hormone receptor status.( 26 , 31 , 32 ) Pooled results from a 2021 meta-analysis found little evidence of association between sedentary time and ER negative breast cancer (RR=1.16; 95% CI: 0.84, 1.60).( 26 ) Results from our study suggest no differential association between sedentary time and ER negative breast cancer as compared to ER positive breast cancer. There are several potential biological mechanisms supporting the relationship of sedentary time and breast cancer risk, albeit the exact mechanisms remain unknown. Various metabolic dysfunctions (i.e., higher levels of fasting glucose, C-reactive protein, and insulin), which are known to increase risk of breast cancer, have been observed with increased sedentary behavior.( 33 , 34 ) Lack of muscle contractile stimulation can suppress lipoprotein lipase activity and glucose uptake.( 35 , 36 ) Additionally, blood pooling in the lower extremities due to prolonged sedentary time can lead to increase markers of inflammation such as tumor necrosis factor-α, interleukin-6, and C-reactive protein.( 37 , 38 ) It has been proposed that adiposity may be an intermediate factor in the relationship between sedentary time and breast cancer risk,( 38 ) though cross-sectional versus time-varying pathways have yet to be disentangled. Sedentary time has also been shown to increase estrogen levels.( 39 ) Increased estrogen production is a known risk factor for both pre- and post-menopausal breast cancer.( 40 ) Yet, mechanisms supporting the inverse association of sedentary time and premenopausal breast cancer remain unclear and further biological research is needed to disentangle how potential mechanisms vary by menopausal status. There were several strengths of this study. The Sister Study is a large, prospective, nationwide cohort of women, which provided the opportunity for robust assessment of the exposure-outcome relationship. Sedentary time was collected during the first detailed follow-up, providing estimates of sedentary time that reflect current trends in screen time engagement, compared to other prospective cohorts that collected sedentary time prior to 2000. We completed several sensitivity analyses, as well as the inclusion of adjusted absolute risk difference estimates to convey public health impact of our findings. We included many relevant confounding factors in all multivariable models, further strengthening our results. The use of only a single measure of self-report of sedentary time during the weekdays was a limitation of this study. Rest-activity cycles vary daily and throughout the lifespan.( 41 ) Asking participants to report their sedentary behaviors in the prior week may not reliably capture differences in workday versus non-workday sedentary behaviors. Additionally, sedentary time was self-reported which may have underestimated time spent in sedentary behavior.( 42 ) One prior study found self-reported sedentary time to be underestimated by 18% in comparison to objective measures collected by wrist-worn accelerometry.( 42 ) The use of a single self-reported measure of sedentary time, and the potential underestimation of sedentary time due to the use of self-reported measures may have led to non-differential misclassification of the exposure and attenuation of the point estimates. Future research should consider leveraging device-measured sedentary behavior, especially in the context of 24-hour time use. Further, smaller sample sizes for the ER- and premenopausal groups, despite the overall large study population, led to imprecise point estimates for some stratified analyses. Approximately 15% of participants who had complete information at first detailed follow-up were missing sedentary time. However, we completed a sensitivity analysis using multiple imputation to include the participants missing sedentary time data and the interpretation of the results remained unchanged. We completed several sensitivity analyses investigating the potential impact of BMI and physical activity on the relationship of sedentary time and breast cancer risk. Yet, due to the complicated nature of the relationship between sedentary time, BMI, and physical activity, it is possible that residual confounding remained. Future studies should explore the relationship of time-varying BMI and physical activity in the relationship between sedentary time and breast cancer incidence. The Sister Study cohort consists primarily of non-Hispanic White women, who were highly educated and who had a sister diagnosed with breast cancer, which limits generalizability to more diverse populations, and women without a family history of breast cancer. In conclusion, results from this study suggest a positive association between sedentary time and breast cancer incidence and that this association may vary by menopausal status. We observed that sedentary time was positively associated with postmenopausal breast cancer, yet inversely associated with premenopausal breast cancer. These results persisted in models adjusted for physical activity, BMI, and other relevant confounding factors. Future research is needed to better identify related mechanisms and how they may vary by menopausal status. Supplementary Material 1 2 3 4