INTRODUCTION Breast cancer remains one of the most prevalent cancers nationally; as of 2022, there were more than four million people with a history of invasive breast cancer in the United States, with an estimated 300,000 more diagnosed each year. 1 , 2 More than 150,000 of these women are living with metastatic disease, one quarter of whom were detected at the time of original diagnosis, known as de novo metastatic breast cancer (dnMBC). 1 , 3 Although early-stage breast cancer is often treatable with an excellent prognosis, dnMBC is a challenging disease with far-reaching impacts on the quality and longevity of patients’ lives. Recent overall survival (OS) estimates of patients with dnMBC diagnosed between 2010 and 2016 is approximately 29 months. 4 Treatment of all breast cancer, and more specifically dnMBC, has advanced over the past 30 years, with some improvements in survival. 4 However, despite these advances, improvements in survival have not uniformly applied to all racial and ethnic groups, as Black women are 40% more likely than White women to die from stage I to III breast cancer. 5 – 8 Racial and ethnic disparities in health outcomes are not unique to breast cancer, but the high incidence of breast cancer relative to other cancers makes the impact of such disparities far-reaching. Similarly, insurance status has been shown to influence access to cancer screening, cancer treatment, and survival outcomes. 9 – 14 Although the potential drivers of such disparities have been investigated in the context of early-stage disease, the extent and impact of racial/ethnic and insurance disparities, specifically in the dnMBC population, are less well defined. 4 Furthermore, survival outcomes for patients with dnMBC have been shown to remain quite poor overall for many patients; although some improvements have been made, most patients with dnMBC still die of their disease. 4 As such, there remains significant room for improvement, in contrast to early-stage breast cancer where survival rates are already quite high. In this study, our aim was to evaluate the potential association of race/ethnicity and insurance status with survival in a large population-based cohort of patients with dnMBC. We sought to more clearly define and understand the disparities that exist in this unique population with frequently poor outcomes, which will help identify future interventions to achieve more equitable care for all patients with breast cancer. METHODS Study Population All patients diagnosed with breast cancer between 1988 and 2016 were selected from the April 2019 release of the SEER 18 data set using the “Site recode ICD-O-3/WHO 2008” variable and selecting “Breast” as the primary site. Several analyses were performed using the 1988–2016 cohort to allow for exploration of outcomes over a longer follow-up period. However, select subgroup analyses were performed for patients diagnosed between 2010 and 2016, because of the absence of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) data before 2010. Patients without metastatic disease or unknown metastatic disease status were excluded. Patients were also excluded on the basis of histology codes other than those identified by the WHO classification of tumors and those with missing or unknown survival data. 15 Socioeconomic variables, including high-school graduation rate, poverty rate, and median household income, were based on the 2013–2017 American Community Survey and are reported at the census-tract-level. Metastatic disease was defined as any indication of clinical or pathologic M1 disease. OS was defined as the time from diagnosis to death due to any cause. Cancer-specific survival (CSS) was defined as the time from diagnosis to death due to breast cancer. All patients who did not die were censored at the time of last follow-up for OS and CSS. Patients who died of causes other than this cancer were censored at the date of death for all CSS analyses. Patients with more than one primary tumor were excluded from the CSS analysis. More information on the SEER variables is included in Appendix Table A1 (online only). Statistical Analyses Patient characteristics were summarized with No. (%) for categorical variables and median (IQR) for continuous variables, for all patients and by race/ethnicity and insurance status. On the basis of the central limit theorem, the data sample was assumed to be asymptotically normal, given all sample sizes were 50. Differences between race/ethnicity groups and insurance groups were tested using chi-square tests and analysis of variance for categorical and continuous variables, respectively. Unadjusted OS and CSS were estimated using the Kaplan-Meier method for all patients diagnosed between 1988 and 2016, and for subgroups including race/ethnicity (non-Hispanic White [NHW], non-Hispanic Black [NHB], non-Hispanic Other [NHO], or Hispanic) and insurance status (insured, Medicaid, or uninsured). Patients with Medicare were included in the insured group, because these patients are not separated in SEER. Tumor subtype was defined as HER2-positive, hormone receptor–positive and HER2-negative, and triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC, defined as hormone receptor–negative and HER2-negative). All subgroup Kaplan-Meier analyses were conducted using only patients diagnosed between 2010 and 2016, except the year of diagnosis subgroup. All phenotypically estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and HER2 borderline results were treated as negative (of all years, 0.5% were PR borderline, 0.2% ER borderline; from the contemporary cohort, 2.8% were HER2 borderline). Insurance status was only reported in SEER starting with patients diagnosed in 2007, so insurance status summaries on the full cohort include patients diagnosed between 2007 and 2016. Log-rank tests were used to compare survival between select subgroups. Cox proportional hazards models were used to determine which factors were associated with OS and CSS, after adjustment for other covariates (sex, age, race/ethnicity, year of diagnosis, high-school graduation rate, median household income, poverty rate, insurance status, phenotype, bone-only metastasis, number of metastatic sites, surgery, treatment with chemotherapy, and treatment with radiation). Notably, select variables in SEER are reported as area-level estimates and not at the patient level, such as graduation rates and income. In addition, comorbidity data are not available in SEER. Only patients with available data for all variables were included in each analysis. Effective sample sizes are included for all tables and figures. No adjustments were made for multiple comparisons to encourage interpretation of results on the basis of effect size and measure of variance in addition to nominal P value and to assess whether statistical differences are clinically meaningful. All statistical analyses were conducted using SAS, version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary NC), or R, version 3.5.1 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). This study was deemed exempt by our institutional review board. RESULTS Demographics and Disease Characteristics Among 1,402,959 patients with breast cancer in SEER-18, a total of 47,034 patients with dnMBC diagnosed between 1988 and 2016 met the selection criteria ( Appendix Fig A1 ). Of these, 19,444 (41.3%) were diagnosed between 2010 and 2016. Median follow-up duration was 91 months (95% CI, 89 to 93). For race/ethnicity, 67.2% of patients were NHW, 16.2% were NHB, 9.5% were Hispanic, and 7.1% were NHO; of the NHO group, 89.3% were Asian/Pacific Islander (n 5 2,983), 7.9% were American Indian/Alaskan Native (n 5 263), and 2.8% were unknown (n 5 94). For insurance status, 73.9% of patients had private/Medicare insurance, 19.7% had Medicaid, and 4.0% were uninsured ( Table 1 ). Tumors were most often grade 3 (43.5%), ER+ (62.4%), and PR+ (49.2%). For the 2010–2016 cohort (when complete data were available), 23.5% were HER21, 57.4% were hormone receptor–positive/HER2-, 12.8% were TNBC, 68.8% had only one metastatic site, and 37.4% had bone-only metastasis. Most patients received chemotherapy (54.3%), but not surgery (54.2%; Table 1 ). Patient and Disease Characteristics by Race/Ethnicity When describing the patient population by race/ethnicity, several differences emerged. Hispanic patients were the youngest, while NHW patients were the oldest (P .001). NHB patients more often had grade 3 tumors (49.8% v 41% NHW, 47.6% NHO, 47.3% Hispanic; P .001) and TNBC (19.3% v 11.5% NHW, 10% NHO, 12.7% Hispanic; P .001). A higher percentage of NHO patients had HER21 disease (28.3% v 23.5% for all patients). Of all race/ethnicity groups, NHB patients had the smallest percentage of bone-only metastases (31.8% v 37.4% for all patients), while NHW patients more frequently had bone-only disease (39.8%, P .001; Table 1 ). Patient and Disease Characteristics by Insurance Status A higher portion of NHB patients were uninsured (6.9%) compared with NHW (2.8%), NHO (4.0%), and Hispanic (6.3%) patients. Likewise, NHW patients more frequently had private/Medicare insurance (81.3%) when compared with Hispanic (55.8%), NHB (61.2%), and NHO (66.0%) patients (P .001). Patients with private/Medicare insurance were more often diagnosed over the age of 70 years (31.5%), compared with those with Medicaid (14.3%) or no insurance (5.0%, P .001). Likewise, uninsured patients more often had grade 3 tumors (47.2%) when compared with insured (41.3%) patients and those with Medicaid (46.7%, P .001). Insured patients less frequently had TNBC (12.4% v 14.7% Medicaid, 14.7% uninsured; P .001; Table 2 ). Unadjusted Analyses of Survival Outcomes by Race/Ethnicity In evaluating OS and CSS rates for patients diagnosed between 2010 and 2016 stratified by race/ethnicity, NHB patients had the lowest median OS and CSS rates with an OS of 21 months and CSS of 24 months. In all subgroups, the differences between median OS and CSS were minimal ( Fig 1 ). When assessing survival stratified by year of diagnosis, differences in survival between subgroups remained ( Appendix Fig A2 ). NHO patients had the numerical longest average survival as well as the numerical greatest change over time, with 3-year OS ranging from 36.0% in 1988 to 46.0% in 2013. The 3-year OS among Hispanic patients remained unchanged. The 3-year OS among NHW patients increased from 33.9% in 1988 to 44.0% in 2013, while NHB patients had the numerical lowest average survival with little change over time (29.4% in 1988 to 31.5% in 2013). Unadjusted Analyses of Survival Outcomes by Insurance Status After stratification of the cohort by insurance status, insured patients had the highest average survival (median OS 31 months, CSS 34 months), compared with patients with Medicaid (OS 25 months, CSS 27 months) and uninsured patients (OS 22 months, CSS 23 months; Fig 2 ). Over time, patients with private/Medicare insurance and Medicaid experienced a separation of OS and CSS, indicating that these populations were more likely to die of non–cancer-related causes in later years; patients with no insurance had less separation of the OS and CSS curves, indicating that they were more likely to die of their dnMBC over the same interval. Over time (2007–2013), the 3-year survival rates for the uninsured subgroup had, on average, the lowest OS and CSS, and the privately insured group (including Medicare) had the highest OS and CSS ( Appendix Fig A3 ). Adjusted Analyses of Survival Outcomes Similar to the unadjusted analyses, NHB patients had worse OS than NHW patients (hazard ratio [HR], 1.24 [95% CI, 1.17 to 1.35]) after adjusting for demographic, disease, and treatment-related variables. There was no statistically significant difference in survival between NHW and NHO or Hispanic patients. After adjustment, privately insured (including Medicare) patients had the highest OS and CSS (REF), followed by patients with Medicaid (OS: HR, 1.20 [95% CI, 1.14 to 1.27]; CSS: HR, 1.19 [95% CI, 1.11 to 1.26]) and uninsured patients (OS: HR, 1.29 [95% CI, 1.16 to 1.44]; CSS: HR, 1.36 [95% CI, 1.21 to 1.53]; Appendix Table A2 ). DISCUSSION This study examined survival outcomes over nearly 3 decades for a contemporary population-based data set of 47,000 patients with dnMBC, specifically looking at outcome differences on the basis of race/ethnicity and insurance status. Our findings are comparable with previous observations in early-stage breast cancer, with notable disparities on the basis of race/ethnicity and insurance status, particularly for NHB patients and those with Medicaid or without insurance. These differences persisted even after adjusting for various demographics, socioeconomic status, metastatic disease burden, and tumor subtype. Although breast cancer remained the most common cause of death for all patients, privately insured (including Medicare) and Medicaid-insured patients were more likely to die of non–cancer-related causes with longer follow-up when compared with uninsured populations. Previous work has suggested that racial and ethnic disparities in oncology outcomes may be due to patients presenting with a later stage of disease. Using SEER (2004–2010) and the nine leading cancer types, including breast, Zhang et al 16 found that overall, Black patients were more likely to present with metastatic cancers in comparison to Asian populations. When specifically looking at the dnMBC population in SEER, previous work has demonstrated that the rates and types of metastases differ between NHW and NHB patients; NHB patients were more likely to have metastases compared with NHW patients. 17 Our study builds on these findings by showing that disparities in outcomes persist even among those with dnMBC, thereby accounting for stage. In addition, we adjusted for the extent of metastatic disease at diagnosis, including site of metastatic disease. Overall, disparities persisted, indicating that the timing of cancer presentation alone does not account for differences in survival. Agarwal et al 18 examined factors associated with racial disparities in breast cancer survival. Also using SEER data (1998–2012) and all tumor stages, they found that median county income and education level, which had previously been found to be associated with patient survival in a combined cohort, were associated with greater patient survival for White patients but not Black patients, demonstrating that combined associations cannot necessarily be generalized for different patient subgroups. This supports our findings of survival disparities persisting after adjustment for factors such as income and highlights the importance of looking at related factors on a subgroup-level basis. However, it is critical to emphasize that race and ethnicity are social constructs, not biological entities, so the effects from social structures presumably contribute to disparities in patient outcomes. 19 , 20 The American Association for Cancer Research Cancer Disparities Progress Report indicates that social determinants of health (eg, systemic racism, socioeconomic status, and environmental factors) can lead to inflammation, chronic stress, and epigenetic modifications that influence cancer biology. 21 For example, one study found that the combined effect of racial differences in neighborhood disadvantage and insurance status had a comparable effect on breast cancer survival when compared with the effect of biomarkers indicating aggressive tumor behavior. 22 Given that race and ethnicity are not biologically based, there must be an interplay between social inequities and biological pathways that help shape cancer patient outcomes. In fact, recent research investigating the relationship between allostatic load and neighborhood opportunity with mortality found that neighborhoods with lower opportunity had higher allostatic loads and worse outcomes. 23 This work suggests that interventions targeting neighborhoods may be another approach to closing these disparity gaps. Some studies have argued that insurance is the direct cause of at least part of the observed disparities between the various racial/ethnic groups. Han et al 24 demonstrated that the poorer survival outcomes of patients with dnMBC for racial/ethnic minorities when compared with NHW patients that were present before Medicaid expansion did not persist in the postexpansion period using a retrospective study. This implies that insurance is likely a driving factor for racial/ethnic differences in survival. Although our study did not directly measure the unique effect that insurance had on racial/ethnic differences in survival, we did find associations between certain racial/ethnic subgroups and specific insurance-based subgroups (eg, NHW patients more frequently had private/Medicare insurance). Additionally, contrary to the aforementioned study, we also demonstrated persistent disparities in survival on the basis of race/ethnicity after adjusting for insurance, in addition to other clinical, demographic, and treatment factors. This difference in findings may be related to other changes that took place in the post-Medicaid expansion time period. Our study adds to the literature that race/ethnicity and insurance status are independently associated with survival, while our adjusted analyses demonstrate that race/ethnicity and insurance are correlated, but their effects on OS/CSS are distinct. Our findings combined with previous data suggest that policy aimed at improving access to health care could potentially decrease some of the racial/ethnic disparities seen in survival, although health insurance alone is not the sole social determinant of outcomes. Another consideration related to our work is the role of financial toxicity in cancer treatment, which disparately affects select races/ethnicities and can be linked to insurance status. Financial toxicity is likely highest in the MBC population, given the need for prolonged use of systemic therapy. 25 Jagsi et al 26 surveyed patients with early-stage breast cancer and noted that financial toxicity was common overall, yet 45.2% of Black and 35.8% of Latina patients reported having to cut down spending on food, compared with 21.5% of White and 22.5% of Asian patients. Similarly, Voleti et al 27 noted a significantly higher likelihood of having financial hardship by racial/ethnic minority patients (P .001 for all) in their cancer patient population. Furthermore, severe financial distress (ie, bankruptcy) has been shown to be associated with higher mortality rates. 28 To address these concerns, some have advocated for improved communication between patients and providers, shared decision making, and using a multidisciplinary management approach to financial navigation, which would likely help mitigate financial toxicity in cancer care. 29 , 30 Given that the cost of MBC is likely to increase substantially in the future, 31 it is imperative that providers and patients engage in solutions to address these problems. This information combined with our findings suggests stresses the need for policy that addresses insurance and socioeconomic disparities at the screening, diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up stages to help decrease health insurance–related mortality. Our study has several strengths and limitations. First, our findings were derived from a large, population-based cohort; however, our subgroup analyses defined race/ethnicity into just four subgroups (NHW, NHB, NHO, and Hispanic); within these broad categorizations, there are many individual subgroups, each of which may face unique challenges and who would benefit from further stratified analyses. In addition, there are patients who may qualify for more than one of these groups, and thus could alter the analyses depending on how they self-identified. Next, we used SEER as our data source, which lacks the granular data needed to further explore the potential causes of certain differences. For example, SEER lacks information on patient-level comorbidities and only provides some variables at the aggregate level for social determinants of health data, thus limiting our analyses. Contributors to disparities in breast cancer treatment are wide-ranging, and thought to include delays in diagnosis, prevalence of biologically aggressive diseases, as well as inadequate and delayed treatment. 32 Notably, SEER does not include information on comorbidities (individually or as a composite index) nor margin status, so we were not able to adjust for those. Additionally, the SEER registries cover only a limited portion of the US population; although they are thought to be generally representative, there may be populations that are underrepresented or overrepresented in our data set. We also excluded patients with missing data, which could introduce bias into our results. 33 In addition, complete tumor subtype and metastatic site data were only available for 2010–2016, limiting our ability to evaluate changes over longer time frames for subgroups with likely different prognoses. 34 , 35 Finally, it is important to recognize that most socioeconomic variables are not available at the patient level in SEER, and as such, these variables were not included in our analyses. Instead, high-school graduation rate, poverty rate, and median household income were used as a proxy. Despite these limitations, our work will serve as a starting point for future research to further explore the potential causes of the disparities identified and ideally lead to solutions that will help eliminate the differences in outcomes. In conclusion, although 3-year OS and CSS have generally improved over time for patients diagnosed with de novo Stage IV breast cancer, we found that smaller benefits were achieved in minority populations. Although the dnMBC population continues to have high mortality rates across all subgroups, disparities on the basis of race/ethnicity and insurance remain, even after adjusting for extent of metastatic disease and tumor subtype. Further research evaluating how and why such disparities continue to persist and how they might be mitigated among patients with metastatic disease will be critical to providing equitable care for all patients with breast cancer and ensuring that all patients have the same opportunity and access to survival benefits as treatments continue to improve.