Introduction The lack of diversity in genomic data resources available to the scientific community greatly limits the translational impact of findings that may result in an exacerbation of health disparities due to differential benefits of study findings across populations ( 1 – 7 ). Among the available resources for genomics research, there are limited options about study design and the availability of nongenomic covariate information available for participants. In this article, we describe a prospective cohort containing diverse participants and information on genetic and nongenetic covariates, with cancer registry–based outcomes. The Multiethnic Cohort Study (MEC) is a NCI–funded prospective cohort study that was established in Hawaii and California (mainly Los Angeles) to identify factors that underlie disease variation across several common racial and ethnic populations in the United States ( 8 ). Recruitment took place between 1993 and 1996. The MEC comprises 215,251 individuals from diverse racial and ethnic backgrounds, allowing for prospective analysis of cancer and other chronic diseases in relation to various lifestyle exposures, particularly diet ( 9 ). The comprehensive data collection, including biological specimens and detailed questionnaires, ensures a remarkably high level of completeness, whereas the high level of variation in demographic characteristics enhances the generalizability of findings. Consistent with Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) reports ( 10 , 11 ), MEC investigations have documented racial and ethnic differences in cancer risk, including higher breast cancer incidence rates in Native Hawaiians and European Americans ( 12 ), higher colorectal cancer rates in Japanese American and African American populations ( 13 ), and higher prostate cancer rates in African American males ( 9 ). In addition to identifying these differences in risk, detailed questionnaire data and participant diversity unique to the MEC have allowed researchers to investigate variation in exposure-disease associations across racially and ethnically diverse populations. The MEC has been used to investigate differences in the effects of smoking on the risk of breast cancer, lung cancer, and pancreatic cancer ( 14 – 16 ); differences in the effects of diabetes on the risk of several cancers ( 17 , 18 ); the effects of diet ( 19 , 20 ); the effect of air pollution on cancer risk ( 21 , 22 ); and the influence of structural and social determinants of health such as neighborhood socioeconomic status (nSES), education, and the built environment on cancer risk ( 23 , 24 ). Research in the MEC suggests that the joint investigation of both nongenetic and genetic variation can explain a portion of the differences in risk across racial and ethnic groups for several chronic diseases ( 12 , 14 , 17 ). To investigate likely causes of disease risk across populations, detailed population descriptors and comprehensive data on genetic and nongenetic risk factors are essential ( 25 – 27 ). Joint modeling of these variables helps epidemiologists identify independent effects of risk factors, assess heterogeneity, and understand how variation in risk factors may contribute to health disparities. Unaccounted phenotypic variation and distribution differences in nongenetic risk factors can lead to heterogeneous effects across populations and influence cross-sample polygenic risk score (PRS) performance ( 27 , 28 ). Context-specific PRS risk estimation addresses many of these challenges by modeling both genetic and nongenetic factors ( 29 ). Due to the lack of diversity in genomics research and limited data to use in joint models, current risk prediction methods may lead to an exacerbation of health disparities ( 1 – 6 ). In the MEC, more than 74,000 participants contributed biological samples that have been genotyped for disease-focused studies, including colorectal cancer, lung cancer, pancreatic cancer, prostate cancer, type 2 diabetes, adiposity, and Alzheimer disease. The MEC has also contributed to several consortium analyses, replication analyses of genome-wide association study (GWAS)–discovered variants, and PRS evaluation in admixed samples across several chronic disease phenotypes ( 30 – 34 ). Much of the research in the MEC has supported the hypothesis that genetic variation is likely to explain a portion of the differences in risk across racial and ethnic groups for several chronic diseases ( 35 – 38 ). Here, we describe the development of a single, multiethnic database of germline variation, nongenetic risk factors, and cancer incidence data. We provide detailed information about sample characteristics, genotype quality control, imputation, and genetic similarity estimation to assist with and facilitate use by researchers. We demonstrate the potential for correlation among genetic, nongenetic, and socially defined population descriptors, emphasizing the importance of avoiding their inadvertent conflation in future analyses. We illustrate the use of this resource for discovery via GWAS and replication for multiple cancers and risk prediction via PRS in time-to-event prospective analyses and demonstrate the complex relationship between genetic and nongenetic variables via integrated multivariable analyses. Materials and Methods The MEC The MEC is composed of more than 215,000 individuals across five self-reported racial and ethnic groups (African American, Japanese American, Latino, Native Hawaiian, and White) who were 45 to 75 years old and resided in California or Hawaii at enrollment. Participants were identified for recruitment using the Department of Motor Vehicle records, Health Care Financing Administration files, and voter registration lists and were recruited into the study from 1993 through 1996 ( 9 ). Participants were mailed a package with a letter that explained the study goals and contained a 26-page baseline questionnaire (in English or Spanish) that collected self-reported information on diet, demographic characteristics, smoking history, anthropometric measures, reproductive factors, chronic conditions, and physical activity ( 8 ). Race and ethnicity were defined by self-report in the baseline questionnaire using terminology and labeling in practice in the early 1990s when the surveys were distributed to participants. When participants reported multiple racial/ethnic groups, the categorization procedure prioritized group membership in the following order: “African American,” “Hawaiian,” “Latino,” “Japanese,” “White,” “Filipino,” “Chinese,” “Korean,” and “Other.” Among the 0.3% of individuals for whom no response was given for the participant but was provided for the mother and father, a race and ethnicity value was created from the parents’ information. In our analysis, we categorized using the five most common racial and ethnic groups, which were targeted for sampling during cohort recruitment. Detailed race and ethnicity responses are available to researchers through a data request. The nSES of MEC participants was based on residential address at baseline. nSES is a composite measure created by principal component analysis of US Census data that incorporates census block group data on education, occupation, unemployment, household income, poverty, rent, and house values. Addresses were geocoded to land parcels or street segments and then linked to the US Census block group ( 21 , 23 , 39 ). Participants were excluded from nSES subanalyses if their address records at baseline could not be geocoded to a census block group. nSES was categorized into quartiles using state distributions. Cancer diagnosis Cancer diagnoses were identified via regular linkage to the California Cancer Registry and the Hawaii Tumor Registry, which are statewide registries that are members of the NCI’s SEER Program. Vital status and cause of death are identified through regular linkage to the National Death Index and state death certificate files. For this study, prostate cancer was defined using International Classification of Diseases for Oncology (ICD-O) codes C619, breast cancer ICD-O C500 to C509, and colorectal cancer ICD-O C180 to C189, C260, C199, and C209. All cancer types excluded cases with ICD-O histology codes 9050 to 9055, 9140, or 9590 to 9992 and included only invasive tumors (behavior 2). Biospecimen collection and samples Biospecimen collection in the MEC took place in two main phases: phase I, as age-matched case–control studies between 1995 and 2001, and phase II, in which MEC participants living within the catchment areas of the University of Hawaii and the University of Southern California were contacted to provide a biospecimen between 2001 and 2007. The complete collection of genetic data within the MEC is titled the MEC Genetics Database. Due to the oversampling of cases in this sample, baseline risk cannot be estimated and used in time-to-event analysis. To properly estimate baseline risk and conduct time-to-event analyses, we created a subsample comprising individuals who were cancer-free at the time of biospecimen collection that we call the MEC Genetics Cohort ( Fig. 1 ). Figure 1. Participant inclusion diagram. Flow diagram showing case counts, person-years, data types available, and analytic approaches for each type of data. BC, breast cancer; CRC, colorectal cancer; F, female; M, male; PC, prostate cancer. Genotyping and quality control Since 2010, 17,197 specimens have been genotyped, primarily with Illumina arrays, as part of 30 GWASs of cancer and other chronic diseases. In 2020 to 2021, the remaining MEC subjects with biosamples ( n = 33,831) were genotyped with the Illumina Global Diversity Array (with 1,645 of the samples from phase I regenotyped in phase II as quality control). The MEC Genetics Database includes biorepository participants with germline variant data ( n = 73,139), which passed quality control procedures. Genotyped samples underwent an intensive quality control process of sample and variant call rate filtering of more than 0.95, within race and ethnicity Hardy–Weinberg Equilibrium violation testing, allele matching, and allele frequency comparisons against corresponding super populations from the 1000 Genomes Project reference data. Following quality control filtering, imputation was performed using the Minimac4 algorithm and the 1000 Genomes Project and TOPMed reference panels ( 40 – 42 ). Imputation was conducted within self-reported race and ethnicity and study, allowing for the calculation of imputation quality statistics within these groups. Projects that utilized the same or similar Illumina arrays, primarily for MEGA chip and OncoArray projects, were merged into a single dataset for imputation. Additional information is provided in the Supplementary Materials and Methods. Population structure estimation We estimated genetic similarity using principal components and clustering within the sample and relative to external 1000 Genomes and the PAGE Study reference data, which have sampling from diverse populations, allowing for comparisons of the diversity of MEC samples ( 43 ). Common autosomal single-nucleotide variants (SNV) across the 30 genotyping platforms that were directly genotyped in all GWAS projects were identified and subsequently subjected to linkage disequilibrium (LD) pruning with an R 2 threshold of 0.1 using all subjects. This resulted in approximately 15.7K SNVs used to estimate principal components by PCair and PCrelate ( 44 , 45 ). ADMIXTURE was used to estimate similarity clusters among MEC participants and the 1,890 reference individuals ( 43 ). The unsupervised analysis used K = 5 and 21,431 SNVs. These K groups are labeled as “clusters.” Analytic methods Covariate and population descriptor correlations To illustrate the associations between self-reported race and ethnicity, genetic similarity, and baseline covariates, we used generalized linear models to estimate partial correlations between baseline covariates and principal components, adjusting for age at sample collection and sex. The model took the form g ( . ) = b 0 + b a g e x a g e + b s e x x s e x + P , where g ( . ) was the identity or logit link and P was a set of 10 principal components, self-reported race and ethnicity, or both. Genome-wide association analysis Using the MEC Genetics Database, we illustrate a multiethnic GWAS using prostate, breast, and colorectal cancer as example phenotypes. We conducted the GWAS using a mixed models approach on 5,117,063 imputed and genotyped variants with an imputation quality of more than 0.8. The analysis was conducted in R using SAIGE to account for cryptic relatedness between samples ( 46 ). GWAS models were adjusted for age at sample collection, sex, the top 10 principal components, and the study project. We used the standard genome-wide significance threshold of 5 × 10 −8 to determine statistical significance. We report associations for known risk loci of each phenotype with heterogeneity statistics to understand how variants used in the genetic risk scores may lead to differences in performance across groups. Genetic risk score calculation For each of the three cancer phenotypes, we estimated the association between genetic risk and incident cancer using log-odds weighted genetic risk scores in the MEC Genetics Cohort. The variants in each PRS were identified using the most current GWAS results for colorectal, prostate, and breast cancer risk ( 47 – 49 ). The weighted PRS was calculated as follows: PR S i = ∑ m = 1 M w m × g i m , where g im is the genotype dosage for individual i for variant m , and w m is the variant-specific log(OR) weight reported from the corresponding original GWAS. All PRS were standardized within self-reported race and ethnicity by the PRS distribution within controls. Time-to-event analysis In PRS time-to-event analysis, age at sample collection was used at entry, and age at first cancer occurrence (for each respective cancer-specific analysis) or death was used as censorship time. Using individual-level data, we conducted high-dimensional data tabulation to create Poisson-distributed data with tabulated strata case counts, within strata person-years, and person-year weighted mean PRS values. We estimated the association between the standardized PRS (continuous variable) and incident cancer in a time-to-event analysis, using the tabulated data, with person-years as an offset term. We report hazard ratios (HR) and corresponding Wald 95% confidence intervals for all PRSs. Using the resulting Poisson models and complementary all-cause mortality time-to-event models, we estimated each cancer’s cumulative risk and 5-year risk across age and PRS quantiles. We estimated the association between standardized PRS (continuous variable) and incident cancer and then estimated cumulative and 5-year risk across age and PRS quantiles. We additionally explored the added contribution of nSES and genetic similarity in risk stratification, as there are few known nongenetic risk factors that may explain the difference in risk across populations. This analysis allowed us to examine how much variation in risk could be attributed to nSES within levels of PRS. Lastly, we explored an approach for risk estimation that does not use self-reported race and ethnicity in risk prediction but bases risk estimation on genetic similarity across samples. Absolute risk estimation In addition to relative risks, we report risk on the absolute scale, aligning with recommendations for improving communication of risk to policymakers, clinicians, and patients ( 50 , 51 ). Age-specific cumulative risk within risk strata k is C R k ( a g e ) = ∑ 0 a g e P k ( a g e ) × S k ( a g e ) × I k ( a g e ) , where K is a covariate level defined by a vector of variable levels such as PRS; P k ( age ) is the probability of survival from all-cause mortality up to a specific age, within strata k , estimated using the all-cause mortality hazard model; S k ( age ) is the probability of not experiencing the specific cancer at an earlier age up to a specific age, within strata k , estimated using the cancer hazard model; and I k ( age ) is the age and exposure level ( k ) specific hazard of cancer. More details about the methods can be found in the supplement. Estimates of incidence for those below 45 are extrapolated based on the model and may be uncertain; however, cumulative risk estimation during the common age of cancer occurrence has less uncertainty and is consistent with SEER estimates. The University of Hawaii and the University of Southern California Institutional Review Boards reviewed and approved this study. Written informed consent was obtained from participants in accordance with recognized ethical guidelines (Declaration of Helsinki, CIOMS, Belmont Report, US Common Rule). The review and approval from the Institutional Review Boards are in accordance with the Department of Health and Human Services regulations in 45 CFR 46. Results Sample sizes Participant characteristics are shown in Fig. 1 and Table 1 . Of the complete MEC cohort ( n = 215,372), 34% ( n = 73,139) are included in the MEC Genetics Database, and 30% are included in the MEC Genetics Cohort ( Fig. 1 ; Table 1 ). There were no notable differences in the distributions of common baseline questionnaire covariates across the total MEC cohort, the MEC Genetics Database, and the MEC Genetics Cohort (Supplementary Fig. S1). Although the differences were small, participation in the MEC Genetics Cohort was associated with slightly higher nSES, lower diabetes prevalence, and a higher prevalence of being a “never smoker.” The MEC Genetics Database includes 10,962 African American, 24,234 Japanese American, 17,242 Latino, 5,488 Native Hawaiian, 14,649 White participants, and 564 participants who did not self-report into one of the five groups (i.e., “other”). In this MEC Genetics Database sample, there were 4,505 cases of breast cancer, 3,049 cases of colorectal cancer, and 6,607 cases of prostate cancer. In the MEC Genetics Cohort, there were 1,880 cases of breast cancer, 1,340 cases of colorectal cancer, and 2,899 cases of prostate cancer that were diagnosed after providing a biospecimen. Table 1. Multiethnic Cohort participant characteristics. Characteristic Combined African American Japanese American Latino Native Hawaiian Other White MEC Complete Cohort ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ n 215,372 34,847 56,917 47,379 14,502 12,196 49,531 Age at entry, mean (SD) 60.4 (8.8) 61.9 (9) 61.6 (9.1) 60.3 (7.7) 57.1 (8.7) 59.1 (8.5) 59.5 (9.1) Year of entry 1994 1993 1994 1994 1994 1994 1994 Female (%) 118,641 (55.1%) 22,119 (63.5%) 29,982 (52.7%) 24,599 (51.9%) 8,185 (56.4%) 7,145 (58.6%) 26,611 (53.7%) Cancer cases ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ Breast 8,174 1,439 2,303 1,262 815 480 1,875 Colorectal 6,706 1,222 2,209 1,301 394 275 1,305 Prostate 11,265 2,201 3,028 2,604 578 510 2,344 MEC Genetics Database ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ n 73,139 10,962 24,234 17,242 5,488 564 14,649 Age at entry, mean (SD) 68.1 (8.4) 69.5 (8.4) 68.7 (8.7) 68.1 (7.5) 64.7 (8.2) 68.2 (9.6) 67.2 (8.5) Year of entry 2003 2002 2003 2003 2003 2003 2003 Baseline age at entry, mean (SD) 59 (8.5) 61.2 (8.8) 59.3 (8.7) 59.3 (7.4) 55.5 (7.9) 58.9 (8) 57.6 (8.6) Female (%) 39,192 (53.6%) 6,305 (57.5%) 12,740 (52.6%) 9,181 (53.2%) 3,150 (57.4%) 331 (58.7%) 7,485 (51.1%) Cancer cases ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ Breast 4,505 772 1,342 778 430 135 1,048 Colorectal 3,049 558 1,028 684 168 61 550 Prostate 6,607 1,352 1,850 1,591 330 117 1,367 MEC Genetics Cohort ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ n 65,408 9,430 22,228 15,487 5,069 296 12,898 Age at entry, mean (SD) 67.8 (8.4) 69.4 (8.4) 68.5 (8.7) 67.8 (7.5) 64.4 (8.2) 64.9 (9.2) 66.7 (8.5) Year of entry 2003 2002 2003 2003 2003 2000 2004 Baseline age at entry, mean (SD) 58.6 (8.4) 60.9 (8.9) 59 (8.7) 58.9 (7.3) 55.2 (7.8) 58.2 (7.9) 57 (8.5) Female (%) 35,888 (54.9%) 5,658 (60%) 11,844 (53.3%) 8,603 (55.5%) 2,920 (57.6%) 188 (63.5%) 6,675 (51.8%) Cancer cases ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ Breast 1,880 294 631 337 229 16 373 Colorectal 1,340 243 489 304 77 4 223 Prostate 2,899 538 1,006 602 182 16 555 Age of entry The mean age at entry into the MEC was 60.4 years. The mean age at entry into the MEC Genetics Database (i.e., age at collection) was 68.1 years, and the mean age of participants included in the MEC Genetics Cohort was 67.8 years ( Table 1 ). Genetic characteristics of the sample There is a high degree of genetic diversity in the MEC Genetics Database. Figure 2 shows principal component plots of principal components 1 to 3 by race and ethnicity, with external reference data from 1000 Genomes and the PAGE Study by superpopulation. There are several unique descriptive characteristics of the genetic similarity distributions. The similarity of Native Hawaiian participants on principal components 1 to 3 primarily extends between 1000 Genomes European and East Asian reference samples. Latino participants have considerable genetic variation across all reference groups, with most participants showing similarity to European and American Indian reference samples. Figure 2. Genetics database principal components. Principal components plotted in three dimensions (PCs 1, 2, 3) for each participant in the Genetics Database, separated by panel for each self-reported racial and ethnic group. Gray points are MEC participants, and nongray dots are participants from the 1000 Genomes reference dataset and PAGE study. Within each self-identified race and ethnicity, more detailed population characteristics can be identified across high-order principal components (Supplementary Figs. S2–S6). Notably, Mainland and Okinawan cluster groups can be identified within the Japanese American participants, along with first-generation admixed participants between the two groups (Supplementary Fig. S5). Among Latinos, higher-order principal components illustrate considerable ancestral variation by geographic region across the Americas (Supplementary Fig. S3). Reference data indicate that Latino MEC participants’ genetic similarity aligns with reference data from South America, Mexico, and the Caribbean. As an additional method to explore global similarity distributions, we estimated unsupervised clustering using ADMIXTURE with k = 5 clusters ( Fig. 3 ). Within each self-reported racial and ethnic group, we observed a large variation in estimated cluster proportions, with many individuals across different self-reported races and ethnicities having similar values. Although we choose to label clusters without consideration of self-reported participant characteristics within each cluster, a comparison of their distributions with reference data reveals that cluster 1 reflects a high degree of African similarity, cluster 2 aligns with Amerindigenous, cluster 3 with East Asian, cluster 4 with European, and cluster 5 with Polynesian. Figure 3. Clustered (k = 5) admixture proportions. Unsupervised clustering of MEC Genetics Database participants using ADMIXTURE with k = 5 clusters. The y -axis corresponds to the portion of the cluster, summing to 100% for each participant. The x -axis represents each participant in the Genetics Database, color-coded by cluster. Genetics data availability and quality Among variants with MAF 1%, all racial and ethnic groups had a mean R 2 ≥ 0.8, except for less common variants among Japanese American samples, indicating good imputation quality across all groups for common variants. The imputation quality of variants with MAF 1% varied considerably across racial and ethnic groups, with the Japanese American and Native Hawaiian subsamples having the poorest quality for rare variants, consistent with the underrepresentation of these populations in the imputation reference panel ( 52 , 53 ). GWAS results To illustrate the use of these data in GWAS analyses, we performed association analyses for breast, colorectal, and prostate cancer in the Genetics Database with TOPMed imputed data. Variants with imputation quality R 2 ≥ 0.8 (Supplementary Fig. S7) were analyzed. We tested 5,117,063 variants in association with the three phenotypes and then filtered GWAS significant associations to variants lying outside of 500 kb around known regions for each phenotype to identify novel associations. Before filtering out known regions, we identified several significant GWAS associations for breast and prostate cancer in the admixed sample. Across GWAS, we observed minimal overdispersion (breast cancer λ = 1.03, colorectal cancer λ = 1.03, prostate cancer λ = 1.03; Supplementary Fig. S8). After applying known region filter rules, no novel GWAS-significant variants remained, which is expected given the smaller relative case sample size within the MEC compared with the corresponding cancer GWAS consortia ( 47 – 49 ). Evaluation of prior GWAS-identified variants In the multiethnic analyses of previously identified GWAS risk variants, 90 out of 313 (28.8%) breast cancer variants, 61 out of 205 (29.8%) colorectal cancer variants, and 183 out of 450 (40.7%) prostate cancer variants were replicated at P ≤ 0.05 in the combined, multiethnic sample (Supplementary Fig. S9; Supplementary Table S1). Ethnic-specific and multiethnic replication statistics are shown in Supplementary Tables S1–S4. A total of 242 (77.3%) breast cancer variants, 176 (85.9%) colorectal cancer variants, and 389 (86.4%) prostate cancer variants had a direction of effect consistent with the original discovery GWAS. The inverse SE weighted correlation between the log-odds (beta) estimates in the combined MEC sample and the analysis from estimates from prior GWAS-identified variants is R 2 = 0.53 for prostate cancer, R 2 = 0.18 for colon cancer, and R 2 = 0.20 for breast cancer (Supplementary Fig. S9). These correlations varied across self-reported race and ethnicity, with Latino and White samples having the strongest correlations. The mean effect sizes across phenotypes in the multiethnic sample were OR = 1.05 for colorectal cancer and breast cancer and OR = 1.06 for prostate cancer per risk allele. Given the discovery of these variants from large sample GWASs, these small allelic effect sizes are expected. There was variation in the heterogeneity of effect sizes by self-reported race and ethnicity. This heterogeneity was quantified using Cochrane Q and the Inconsistency Index, I 2 . The distributions of these statistics show that 21 out of 205 (10.2%) colorectal cancer variants, 35 out of 313 (11.2%) breast cancer variants, and 69 out of 450 (15.3%) prostate cancer variants have significant heterogeneity across racial and ethnic groups, defined by P heterogeneity 0.05. Prostate cancer had 240 out of 450 (53.3%) variants with an I 2 greater than 80%, colorectal cancer had 103 out of 205 (50.2%), and breast cancer had 145 out of 313 (46.3%). PRS analysis Evaluation of racial and ethnic-specific distributions of all weighted and nonstandardized PRSs showed a lower mean PRS for breast cancer among White participants and a higher mean PRS for prostate cancer among African American participants. HRs and cumulative risk for breast cancer, colorectal cancer, and prostate cancer across race and ethnicity by PRS quantile are shown in Fig. 4 . The largest per-SD increase in risk was seen among White males for prostate cancer, in which a 1 − SD increase in PRS was associated with 2.13 (95% CI, 1.93–2.34) times the rate of prostate cancer. There was variation in the effect size and SE between PRSs and each cancer type across racial and ethnic groups. This variation in SEs across racial and ethnic groups originates not only from differences in person-years and case counts but also from PRS performance (as seen in the PRS variant replication). The absolute risk (cumulative and 5-year) of prostate cancer and breast cancer was considerably higher than that of colorectal cancer, reflecting both higher baseline risk and PRS effects (Supplementary Figs. S10 and S11). At age 85, a self-reported African American male at the 95% genetic risk percentile has a 45% (38.8%, 52.8%) cumulative risk of prostate cancer, whereas a White male at the same age and PRS has a risk of 39.6% (33.1%, 47.6%; Fig. 4 ; Supplementary Table S5). At age 80, on the 5-year risk scale, the African American male’s 5-year risk would be 8.4% (6.3%, 11.3%), and the White male’s risk would be 8.8% (6.5%, 12.1%; Supplementary Fig. S11). The lower 5-year risk reflects the effect of competing risks affecting risk over the next 5 years. Figure 4. Absolute risk curves for breast cancer, colorectal cancer, and prostate cancer. HRs (per SD increase) and cumulative risk of breast, colorectal, and prostate cancers stratified by self-reported racial and ethnic group, color-coded by PRS quantile, within the Genetics Cohort. Correlations between anthropometric measures, diet quality, lifestyle factors, comorbidities, population descriptors, and genetic similarity measures In genetic analyses, genetic similarity should be used strictly as an adjustment factor to account for confounding due to population stratification. Genetic similarity most often does not capture genetic risk and should not be conflated with race or ethnicity or with other factors in which race and ethnicity may be a proxy. We conducted a series of correlation analyses to illustrate the association between genetic similarity (i.e., principal components) and race and ethnicity across a collection of self-reported baseline variables and cancer (Supplementary Figs. S12–S15). These results are presented in categories of anthropometric measures, diet quality, lifestyle factors, and cancer. Anthropometric measures had the strongest correlations with genetic and nongenetic population descriptors. For example, principal components accounted for 30% of the variation in height, and self-reported race and ethnicity accounted for 27% (Supplementary Fig. S15). When both race and ethnicity and principal components are modeled jointly, both variables accounted for 30% of the variation in height, illustrating a similar predictive ability of both variables for this phenotype. The 3% difference in predictive ability between these two measures is evident in the ethnic-specific correlation analyses. For example, when restricting the sample to Native Hawaiian participants, principal components still capture variation in height, accounting for 11% of the variation within the subsample. For lifestyle risk factors, we still observe considerable variation accounted for by race and ethnicity or principal components, indicating that genetic and nongenetic descriptors are associated with additional unmeasured variables that determine or are correlated with nSES. This analysis highlights the need for careful consideration of the use of population descriptors in risk analysis as these variables often are highly correlated with other risk factors. Following recent National Academy of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM) recommendations, researchers should directly evaluate these risk factors when available. Absolute risk by nSES and PRS Using joint models to understand the independent effects of each variable on disease risk, we modeled cancer as an effect of PRS and nSES stratified by race and ethnicity. Using these models, we estimated cumulative risk by age (Supplementary Figs. S16 and S17). The PRS risk stratification we observed in this analysis was similar to the prior PRS models ( 47 – 49 ). However, we now observed additional minor risk variation by nSES within the PRS percentile. For example, among African American males who were at the 95% PRS risk quantile, those in the 0% to 25% nSES group had a 49.8% chance of developing prostate cancer by age 85, whereas those in the 76% to 100% nSES group had a 57.5% chance of developing prostate cancer at the same age (Supplementary Fig. S17). We illustrate the added value of each variable in risk estimation in Table 2 for four hypothetical individuals with a known nSES and PRS. Individual 1 is an African American male with a PRS at the 95th percentile who is at the lowest quartile of nSES. When estimating cumulative risk at age 85 using only age and race and ethnicity, we see a cumulative risk of 26.8%. This is the same risk as individual 2, who has a different PRS and nSES. However, as PRS and nSES are associated with prostate cancer risk, each additional variable adds value to risk stratification. nSES explains minimal variation in prostate cancer risk, resulting in a small change in estimated risk when this variable is included (26.8% vs. 25.6%). When PRS is included in the model, individual 1’s risk moves from 27.8% to 45%. When all variables are included in risk prediction, this individual has an estimated 49.8% chance of having had prostate cancer by age 85, versus the 27.8% using only age and self-reported race and ethnicity. Table 2. Predicted cumulative risk of prostate cancer at age 85, given predictor variables. Variable Age + race and ethnicity +PRS +nSES +PRS +nSES Individual 1 (race/ethnicity = African American, PRS = 95%, nSES = Q1) 26.77% 45% 25.64% 49.79% Individual 2 (race/ethnicity = African American, PRS = 5%, nSES = Q4) 26.77% 12.02% 30.96% 10.50% Individual 3 (race/ethnicity = White, PRS = 95%, nSES = Q1) 16.52% 39.56% 14.63% 31.62% Individual 4 (race/ethnicity = White, PRS = 5%, nSES = Q4) 16.52% 4.29% 17.82% 5.66% NOTE: Predicted cumulative risk of prostate cancer at age 85 for four hypothetical individuals. Predicted cumulative risk is shown using four models, including different sets of predictor variables. The base model is age + race and ethnicity. The second model adds PRS to the base model, the third model adds nSES to the base model, and the final model adds both PRS and nSES to the base model. Assessment of genetic risk in the combined MEC samples Using the same modeling techniques as above, we estimated the cumulative risk of prostate cancer in a multiethnic model to compare cumulative risk estimates between self-reported race and ethnicity stratified models and the genetic similarity model. In this analysis, cancer risk is modeled as a function of PRS and the population descriptor of interest. We fit two models to compare estimates: one using the population descriptor of self-reported race and ethnicity and the second using genetic similarity cluster variables (k = 5). Across most cancer types and self-reported racial and ethnic groups, we observed similar performance between the self-report and genetic similarity approaches. In the self-reported race and ethnicity model, an individual who self-reports as an African American male at the 90% PRS percentile would be estimated to have a prostate cancer cumulative risk of 17.1% at age 85 (Supplementary Figs. S18 and S19). If replacing self-reported race and ethnicity with a measure of genetic similarity (k = 5) in a multiethnic model, an individual with a genetic similarity characteristic of an average African American participant (cluster 1 = 85% and cluster 2 = 15%) and the same PRS of 90% would have a similar cumulative risk of 16.2%. Discussion The lack of diversity in genomics data is a critical issue discussed by the scientific community, as it may lead to the exacerbation of health disparities and hinder the translational impact of genetic findings ( 1 – 6 ). Resolving this issue has been the goal of several national initiatives ( 54 – 56 ). Although the disparity in ancestral representation has been shrinking, many currently available data sources are limited by their degree of diversity, study design, and availability of nongenomic covariates. Extensive genetic diversity across populations remains unexplored, especially within a single prospective cohort. The MEC Genetics Database and Genetics Cohort provide a unique opportunity to explore potentially overlooked important markers of cancer susceptibility and facilitate the development of risk models accounting for population-specific allelic heterogeneity ( 2 – 5 ). Descriptive and analytic characteristics Our descriptive and analytic results highlight the unique and valuable characteristics of the MEC Genetics Database and the nested Genetics Cohort consisting of incident cases. We observed high genetic diversity across many populations, representing genetic variation within the five populations initially targeted for recruitment. Due to the nested nature of these data, both the Genetics Database and Genetics Cohort contain detailed baseline and follow-up information on participants’ lifestyle, diet, comorbidity, reproductive, and environmental factors collected across follow-up. We found few differences between the complete MEC, the MEC Genetics Database, and the MEC Genetics Cohort across numerous covariate means and prevalence measures. This characteristic supports the generalizability of findings across data sources within the MEC. With respect to the analysis, the GWAS and replication results support the validity of the data source and analytic methods. Given our model specifications, we did not identify any overdispersion issues, and we observed an expected distribution of replication effect sizes in the combined multiancestry sample. These results illustrate comprehensive control of population stratification, cryptic relatedness, and batch/project effects that may be identified through overdispersion. When used in transancestry meta-analyses and fine-mapping, the MEC Genetics Database is, and will continue to be, a resource for samples of admixed ancestry, contributing to the discovery and characterization of risk variants for cancer and other chronic diseases ( 32 ). In the replication phase of this study, we found significant heterogeneity for 21 out of 205 colorectal cancer variants, 35 out of 313 breast cancer variants, and 69 out of 450 prostate cancer variants tested across all racial and ethnic groups. Research supports the idea of homogeneous SNP effects across populations ( 57 – 59 ). The heterogeneity we observe may be due to differing LD structures between populations, resulting in tagging SNPs that ineffectively capture genetic variation associated with the phenotypes. Alternatively, heterogeneous effects may also be observed through epistasis and/or gene–environment interactions, in which the prevalence of the interacting component (allele frequency or prevalence of the lifestyle/environmental component) varies across populations, resulting in different observed effect sizes ( 60 ). Given the vast information on nongenetic risk factors, including environmental exposures (e.g., air pollution), the MEC has the information potentially to address these questions. Genetic risk score analyses In addition to discovery, the MEC Genetics Database is a powerful resource for PRS evaluation and characterization, in which subsets of this data have already been used for these analyses ( 30 , 31 ). Individual-level time-to-event data have allowed us to estimate absolute risk within levels of several variables. Current methods for estimating absolute risk, such as iCare, use external cancer incidence and all-cause mortality summary statistics to estimate absolute risk across and within populations ( 32 , 61 ). This is done as most biobanks have complex, often hospital-based sampling that does not allow for valid baseline risk estimation within the sample. In contrast to using external baseline risk information, we tabulated time-to-event data into life tables across self-reported race and ethnicity, sex, PRS quantile, and ancestry quantile and then used this tabulated data to calculate model-based and empirical absolute risk across covariate levels. This stratified analysis allows for baseline risk and cumulative survival probabilities to vary across covariate levels. This is important in cases of pleiotropic traits (i.e., traits that are associated with variants that affect the risk of competing events). Thus, we are not required to assume that baseline and age-specific risk is the same across exposure and covariate levels within and among race, ethnicity, and ancestry. In our PRS analyses, we estimated HRs, incidence, cumulative risk, and 5-year risk by PRS level. Although we observed variation in the effect sizes and performance of PRS across racial and ethnic groups, the absolute risk, in many cases, was higher among racial and ethnic groups with smaller effect sizes. This pattern is seen most clearly with PRS performance across prostate cancer. The random error in these estimates was estimated using SE from model variable estimates; however, it is important to note that there is additional random error in an individual’s estimated PRS value itself that will further affect the uncertainty of the cumulative risk estimates ( 62 ). To ensure the accuracy of our baseline risk, age effects, and survival estimation, we compared the 50% PRS risk group (i.e., average risk) against SEER age-specific cumulative risk estimates and incidence. This comparison showed close agreement in estimates of age-specific cumulative risk and incidence ( 11 ). Interaction analyses and population descriptors in genetic risk estimation We illustrate the complex and often strong associations between genetic similarity, self-reported race and ethnicity, baseline characteristics, and incident cancer in several analyses. In the context of PRS effect estimation and risk prediction, the relationship between these variables makes it difficult to parse the individual variable effects and estimate strata-specific cumulative risk ( 63 ). Recent reports, such as the NASEM report “Using Population Descriptors in Genetics and Genomics Research” and later commentaries, such as the “Guidance on Use of Race, Ethnicity, and Geographic Origin as Proxies for Genetic Ancestry Groups in Biomedical Publications,” discuss many of these complexities and possible pitfalls, misuse, and misinterpretation of results using population descriptors and genetic similarity ( 26 , 64 ). The relationship among population descriptors, common genetic variation, and nongenetic covariates has been established in separate datasets; however, in our analyses, we illustrate these associations in a single dataset and in joint models. Genetic similarity measures such as principal components and ancestry clusters, often interpreted as “ancestry percentage,” are commonly used in genetic epidemiology. These variables are sometimes used as indicators of genetic risk as they are estimated using genetic variation. Our correlation analysis illustrates how this form of interpretation is often invalid. We illustrate the strong association between population descriptors (i.e., race and ethnicity) and these measures of genetic similarity, showing that these genetic similarity variables are indicators of other population descriptors (e.g., race and ethnicity), which are, in turn, strongly associated with nongenetic exposures (e.g., smoking prevalence). Within self-reported race and ethnicity for many variables, we still observe phenotypic variation explained by principal components in the correlation analysis. Although this stratified analysis restricts each race and ethnicity to remove most variation explained by principal components, residual variation in principal components may still capture variation in nongenetic risk factors. This phenomenon can best be observed in “control” variables that are not expected to be directly caused by common genetic variation. Comparison of risk estimation using a self-report and genetic similarity approach Population descriptors provide insight into health disparities and differences in risk across populations. A comparison of these risk estimates across models illustrates how measures of disease risk by genetic similarity are essentially the same as using self-reported race and ethnicity, likely reflecting the strong association between these genetic similarity values and self-reported race and ethnicity, which may also be associated with common nongenetic risk factors. These PRS analyses highlight the point in the NASEM report’s guidance to “replace or supplement descent-associated population descriptors with information about the relevant factors that mediate differences in environmental exposures.” In models using population descriptors to generate risk estimates, individuals within groups represent the average covariate distribution within that descriptor level. In addition, the use of genetic similarity may not accurately capture or align with the underlying risk factors. Only the inclusion of the actual disease risk factors in the model may represent the true tapestry of risk. Thus, a diverse and admixed cohort with varied environmental and lifestyle levels, such as the MEC, allows for the examination of these effects in joint models. These models, combined with an understanding of the costs and benefits of various screening protocols and with quantification of the uncertainty, have the potential to greatly affect risk prediction for all individuals ( 65 ). Conclusion Identifying and testing genetic markers of cancer susceptibility across admixed racial and ethnic populations hold immense potential with widespread applicability and significance. The inclusion of admixed populations in genetics research can provide a clearer understanding of the spectrum of allelic variation that underlies population risk and disease heritability, facilitate the development of risk models accounting for allelic heterogeneity between populations, and contribute to the formulation of preventive strategies targeting individuals at high risk. The comprehensive nature of these data provides opportunities for improved fine-mapping analyses, cross-population variant and PRS replication, absolute risk estimation, and gene–environment interaction analyses. Our presented results show the extensive genetic diversity and comprehensive participant data as a rich resource for future genetic and epidemiologic research. Future research using our Genetics Cohort can include more nuanced analyses such as fine-mapping, cross-population variant replication, and exploration of gene–environment and gene–lifestyle interactions. Such research is vital for addressing the critical issue of diversity in genomics and reducing health disparities. Additionally, the database’s genetic diversity highlights its value in assessing progress toward equitable, personalized medicine. Overall, the MEC Genetics Database sets the stage for groundbreaking work in understanding complex genetic interactions and their implications for public health and personalized healthcare across diverse populations. Supplementary Material Supplemental Table 1 Replication Summary Statistics Supplemental Table 2 Replication results 1kp3 imputed breast cancer Supplemental Table 3 Replication results 1kp3 imputed colorectal cancer Supplemental Table 4 Replication results 1kp3 imputed prostate cancer.xlsx Supplemental Table 5 Cancer and PRS Specific Cumulative Risk at Age 80 Supplementary Mats and Methods Quality control, Imputation, and Absolute Risk Calculation Methods Supplementary Figure 1 Sub-cohort characteristic comparisons Supplementary Figure 2 PC2xPC4xPC5 for MEC Native Hawaiians colored by composite self-report variable Supplementary Figure 3 PC2xPC3xPC9 for MEC Latinos colored by birth area from baseline questionnaire Supplementary Figure 4 PC2xPC3xPC5 for MEC Whites colored by composite self-report variable Supplementary Figure 5 PC2xPC4xPC7 for MEC Japanese Americans colored by composite self-report variable and MEC Okinawan group. Top right small figure shows all the reference subjects and MEC Okinawan group only Supplementary Figure 6 PC1xPC2xPC8 for MEC African Americans where African reference subjects were grouped into larger regions Supplementary Figure 7 GWAS Manhattan Plots for Breast Cancer, Colorectal Cancer, and Prostate Cancer Supplementary Figure 8 GWAS QQ Plots for Breast, Colorectal, and Prostate Cancer Supplementary Figure 9 Replication analysis beta values plotted against external GWAS effect sizes by phenotype and race and ethnicity Supplementary Figure 10 Incidence rates of BC, CRC, and PC by race and ethnicity and PRS quantile Supplementary Figure 11 Five-year risk of BC, CRC, and PC by race and ethnicity and PRS quantile Supplementary Figure 12 Partial Correlations of Dietary Factors. CO = Combined, AA = African American, JA = Japanese American, LA = Latino, NH = Native Hawaiian, WH = White Supplementary Figure 13 Partial Correlations of Lifestyle Factors. CO = Combined, AA = African American, JA = Japanese American, LA = Latino, NH = Native Hawaiian, WH = White Supplementary Figure 14 Partial Correlations of Cancer. CO = Combined, AA = African American, JA = Japanese American, LA = Latino, NH = Native Hawaiian, WH = White Supplementary Figure 15 Partial Correlations of Anthropometric Measures. CO = Combined, AA = African American, JA = Japanese American, LA = Latino, NH = Native Hawaiian, WH = White Supplementary Figure 16 Cumulative risk of cancer by PRS and nSES across age Supplementary Figure 17 Cumulative risk of cancer by PRS and nSES at age 85 Supplementary Figure 18 Cumulative risk by cluster values and self-reported race and ethnicity by age Supplementary Figure 19 Cumulative risk by cluster values and self-reported race and ethnicity at age 85