Statistical testing is a common practice within the scientific community. The most common statistical practice among health scientists today remains null-hypothesis significance testing (NHST). NHST itself is a combination of two statistical methodologies: Fisher's significance testing and the Neyman-Pearson hypothesis testing approach. Popularized by Ronald Fisher, the p -value was defined as “the probability of the observed result, plus more extreme results, if the null hypothesis were true,” providing an index to measure the strength of the evidence against the null hypothesis [ 1 , 2 ]. However, Fisher's suggestion of a preliminary, heuristic p -value of 0.05 has created the misunderstanding in health research that it is the appropriate threshold for all statistical tests. Fisher later clarified that no universal thresholds should be considered. In contrast, Neyman and Pearson provided a distinct framework focused on formal decision rules for accepting or rejecting hypotheses, emphasizing control of Type I and Type II error rates in repeated sampling [ 3 ].In the early formulation of the Neyman-Pearson framework, sometimes “acceptance” terminology was used. Modern treatments emphasize “rejection” versus “non-rejection,” as failing to reject does not constitute evidence to accept a hypothesis. [ 4 ] For example, a negative result in a medical test for a disease does not prove absence of disease, as other conditions or limitations of the test could explain the result. [ 5 , 6 ] These two approaches differ fundamentally in their assumptions and goals: Fisher's method assesses the compatibility of data with a single hypothesis, while Neyman-Pearson's framework is centered on decision-making between competing hypotheses. Combining these approaches within NHST without careful attention to their assumptions can foster confusion and misinterpretation in health research [ 7 , 8 ]. The p -value is best understood as a direct measure of the compatibility of the observed data with the null hypothesis, as assessed by the specific statistical model used. A low p -value indicates that data would be unusual if all model assumptions held. A “low” p -value should be interpreted in context rather than via a universal cutoff. Importantly, the p -value does not measure the probability that the null hypothesis is true, nor does it reflect the probability that the observed findings are due to chance alone. Furthermore, because the p -value is calculated under a specific statistical model, different defensible models or analytical choices can yield different p -values for the same data. The purpose of the p -value is not to divide results into those which are and are not of worldly significance but rather to provide additional evidence, rather than sole evidence of the repeatability and reproducibility of an experimental result [ 9 , 10 ]. A low p -value indicates that the data is unusual if all the assumptions used to compute it were correct, under ideal conditions; however, “low” is not only a matter of subjective judgment, but should also be determined by context-specific cost-benefit analysis, as the appropriate threshold for evidence may vary depending on the scientific, clinical, or policy implications involved [ 11 , 12 ]. Interpreting “statistical significance” correctly is challenging, and the concept itself has been widely debated, with many arguing that it may not be inherently meaningful. Reflecting on these concerns and the risk of misinterpretation, many leading journals discourage or ban the use of significance testing and p -values. Although, the scientific community has engaged in debate and discussion regarding the merits and limitations of such bans. [ 13 , 14 ] In response to these concerns, the American Statistical Association (ASA) released a statement clarifying several widely agreed-upon principles that underlie the proper use and interpretation of p -values. [ 15 ] The ASA statement emphasizes that p -values do not measure the probability that a studied hypothesis is true or that the data was produced by random chance alone. The statement warns against basing scientific conclusions or policy decisions solely on whether a p -value passes a specific threshold, such as the conventional, yet purely arbitrary, two-sided p-value ( p 0.05). The ASA's statement underscores the importance of full reporting and transparency in research and stresses the dangers of “cherry-picking” promising findings or engaging in selective inference which can lead to spurious excess of statistically significant results in the published literature. [ [15] , [16] , [17] , [18] ] Misinterpretation of statistical significance tests and confidence intervals has previously been cataloged by Greenland et al. [ 9 ] The authors asserted that such errors were common and pervasive in modern epidemiology. [ 9 ] Greenland et al. hypothesized that the continued misinterpretation and inappropriate application of statistical significance tests may be due to the complexity and nuance of the tests themselves, and that such complexity may lead to misinterpretation of findings. [ 9 ] To illustrate this, Greenland et al. [ 9 ] published a list of 25 misinterpretations of p -values and confidence intervals, and crafted guidelines for the proper use and reporting of statistical significance tests based in part on Goodman 2008 (Supplementary Table S1) [ 2 ]. Goodman emphasized that a frequently encountered issue within scientific publications was the lack of clearly stated analysis protocols and assumptions. [ 2 ] This has led to the practice of selecting analyses for presentation based solely upon the p -values they yielded. [ 2 ] Some common misinterpretations highlighted by Greenland et al. included treatment of the p -value as the probability of the null hypothesis or the alternative hypothesis being true, confusing statistical and practical significance, and incorrectly comparing p -values across strata and studies [ 9 ]. Several other authors have addressed the common misinterpretations and misuses of p -values and confidence intervals (CIs) in epidemiology. [ 19 ] Poole argues that researchers should focus on the precision of estimates, as indicated by the width of confidence intervals, rather than interpreting low p -values as direct evidence of result validity or trustworthiness. [ 19 ] Poole repeats the suggestion to use Bayesian methods when the probability of hypotheses being true is of interest, rather than NHST. It is important to note that just like with p -values, there is no universally accepted standard for making a “discovery” when appraising CIs. Despite common assumptions, the 95% confidence intervals (CIs) are not the universally agreed best measure of precision, indeed some branches of epidemiology use 90% CI (essentially a two-sided p 0.1). In fact, it is always possible to construct a CI for a given estimate that includes the null by manipulating the percent value, e.g. 99.999% CI. Therefore, CIs should not be viewed as tools for determining whether hypotheses fall “inside” or “outside” the interval. Rothman (1978) emphasized confidence intervals are better understood as tools for describing the shape of compatibility distribution: the distribution of data–model compatibility as a function of hypothesized parameter values [ 20 ]. For example, values near the point estimate correspond to high p -values (close to 1), whereas values near the interval bounds correspond to lower p -values (e.g., near 0.05 in a 95% CI). While confidence intervals offer a useful way to vizualize compatability, other commonly reported statistics are not as straight forward. The interpretability of the T-statistic, for example, is limited: except in large samples (where it approximates a Z -statistic), the T-statistic is not readily comparable across studies unless the degrees of freedom are known. Moreover, the assessment of statistical precision should not rely on arbitrary thresholds, but should be guided by prior knowledge, the context of the research question, and relevant cost-benefit considerations [ 8 , 11 , 21 ]. S-values provide an alternative, information-based measure that helps quantify the strength of statistical evidence, offering clearer interpretation than traditional significance thresholds. In this paper, we explore the use of NHST ( p -values) and confidence intervals in recent epidemiological literature published in leading journals. Our aim is to 1) assess statistical misinterpretation in leading epidemiologic journals, 2) highlight examples of best practices, and 3) discuss common challenges of statistical interpretation. By focusing on improving statistical literacy and fostering better reporting standards we hope to support continued progress in the field of epidemiology. 1 Methods We selected a random sample of the entire 2022 publication period of papers appearing across three leading epidemiological journals: The International Journal of Epidemiology (IJE), Epidemiology (EPI), and the American Journal of Epidemiology ( AJE). These journals were selected with the intended goal of mirroring a previous study conducted by Jurek et al. (2007) which looked at exposure measurement error (EME) across the same three journals. [ 22 ] It is important to note that the Jurek et al. (2007) paper did not assess statistical significance in its analysis. As such, this work should be regarded as exploratory, providing preliminary insights into how null hypothesis significance testing and confidence intervals are being interpreted in leading journals. In our assessment, commentaries, letters to the editor, and corrections were excluded. An initial random sample of 80 publications from the selected publication year was obtained via random sampling in R (version 4.2.2) and re-examined against the inclusion criteria. Similar to Jurek et al. 2007, we only included articles that investigated exposure-outcome associations (injury or disease). Sixteen papers were excluded as they did not meet this criterion, leaving 64 articles (Supplementary Table S2). Two authors (MKH and AJR) independently read, examined and cataloged the selected studies in terms of the use of significance testing. Disagreements were resolved by consensus after re-review (GM/IB). Papers were critically analyzed and searched for (a) whether statistical significance testing was performed (yes/no), (b) the method used to assess significance (e.g., p -value or 95% confidence interval), and (c) language in papers that framed associations as causal or definitive based solely on their observation, rather than on explicit statistical testing. GM and IB reviewed the classifications of each article. The use of significance testing in univariate analysis, covariate selection, or sensitivity analyses was not considered or classified as a misinterpretation of statistical testing. Though important, these practices were beyond the scope of our current assessment framework, which focused primarily on the presentation and interpretation of primary results. The misinterpretations of NHST were cataloged according to rubrics of Greenland et al. (Supplementary Table S1). [ 9 ] Of note, IJE and EPI placed recommendations and guidelines limiting or discouraging significance testing. IJE actively discourages terms such as “statistically significant” and “significant,” statements in method sections such as “findings at p 0.05 were considered significant.” [ 23 ] IJE also encourages authors to provide effect estimates with confidence intervals and estimated p -values (not just inequalities such as “ p 0.05”) but refrain from using the term “significant” in the results and discussion section. [ 24 ] EPI “strongly discourage[s] the use of categorized p -values and language referring to statistical significance” in reference to estimates of causal effect. Instead, the journal encourages authors to use interval estimation to convey precision of the estimate. Other journals have adopted a similar stand, e.g. Global Epidemiology. The AJE does not explicitly discourage the use of p -values or the term “statistical significance.” Their instructions specify how to report p -values, including formatting, significance figures for reporting and indicating if the p -value is one-sided or two-sided. 2 Results A total of 64 articles were included in our analysis. Fourteen articles (21.9%) reported the use of statistical significance testing, with four (6.3%) presenting results using 95% confidence intervals and the remaining ten (15.6%) relying on p -values. Interpretations were generally cautious in these leading journals. We did not find any major errors in the interpretation of p- values and interval estimates in the reviewed papers. The result is consistent with the possibility of a broader improvement in the sense that we found a more appropriate interpretations than the ones implied by NHST. Our evaluation did not assess the validity of NHST as a framework. Many papers avoided the emphasis of p -values or dichotomous “significance” thresholds. When reported, authors commonly presented exact p -values alongside effect estimates and intervals. These observations pertained only to these three journals and years. In a few cases, we observed opportunities to improve the communication of statistical findings but note that these did not affect the validity of the results. For example, some studies predefined a fixed p -value threshold (e.g., p 0.05) without explicit justification, which may inadvertently encourage dichotomous interpretations. Additionally, terms like “statistically significant” occasionally appeared without accompanying effect sizes or confidence intervals, potentially obscuring the practical relevance of findings. Similarly, comparisons of effect estimate sometimes overemphasized whether confidence intervals included the null value rather than fully interpreting their range. These observations align with broader calls to integrate effect sizes, precision estimates, and contextual interpretation into statistical reporting. While no overt errors in methodology were identified, these nuances highlight opportunities to further align epidemiological communication with evolving best practices, reinforcing the field's commitment to robust and nuanced statistical discourse. The papers and associated quotes that triggered such concerns are summarized in Supplementary Table S3. 3 Commendable uses of p -values Here we highlight a few examples of uses of p -values in our sample research that we consider commendable. Though not an exhaustive list of the papers reviewed that used p- values, we hope these examples provide a guide to commendable uses of the p- value. Masselot et al. [ 25 ] assessed differential mortality risks associated with PM 2.5 components of particle air pollution. Authors used p -values to assess effect modification and to explain parts of the heterogeneity. They write: “[a] Wald test on composition variable coefficients had a p -value of about 0.004, indicating that the composition explains part of the [full model's] heterogeneity (p. 8). [ 25 ]” Authors indicated that the model's Cochran Q was 312.6 with an associated I 2 of 36.0% which may indicate moderate heterogeneity. In their abstract, Masselot et al. [ 25 ] support their conclusions with effect estimates, rather than overly relying on p -values. O'Brien et al. [ 26 ] adopted a similar approach to Masselot et al. [ 25 ] in evaluating heterogeneity using p -values of Wald's test, reporting exact p -values in text and using them as a measure of degree of evidence without any apparent a priori cutoffs. These two papers report effect estimates alongside exact p -values, rather than relying solely on arbitrary significance thresholds. This is an excellent practice we want to highlight because it provides a more nuanced and informative interpretation of the data, allowing readers to assess both the magnitude and the precision of the observed effects. Posada de la Paz et al. [ 27 ] randomly sampled patients in a cohort with toxic oil syndrome to assess their quality of life. The authors set a 2-sided p 0.05 as a threshold of statistical significance. The authors did not report any p -values in the results section and only noted that “statistical significance was set at p 0.05” but gave no indication of using any p -values in their interpretation, focusing entirely on the magnitude and precision of the estimates. [ 27 ] The results seem to have been written without any reference to p -values, which is an excellent practice in epidemiology. Similarly, Wootton et al. [ 28 ] examined trajectories of attention-deficit hyperactivity. Authors performed a highly complex statistical analysis and estimated many p -values, none of which are mentioned in the main text, but fully reported in the supplementary materials. By focusing on the magnitude and precision of effect estimates in the main text and avoiding emphasis on p -values, these studies exemplify best practice in epidemiology, as this approach encourages interpretation based on the actual size and uncertainty of effects rather than arbitrary significance thresholds. LeClair et al. [ 29 ], examined the associations between the level of American football playing and brain injury, avoiding the use of p -values altogether. The authors recognized that random errors played a role in their analysis and focused instead on quantifying effect estimates after accounting for systematic error due to selection bias. Focusing on effect estimates and their uncertainty, while minimizing reliance on p -values or dichotomous significance testing, aligns with best practice in epidemiology because it provides a more meaningful assessment of the data, encourages interpretation based on the magnitude and plausibility of effects, and avoids the common pitfalls of misinterpreting statistical significance as clinical or scientific importance. Unfortunately, the authors do resort to language of “significance” when reporting whether their 95% uncertainty interval – which accounts for selection bias, unlike a 95% CI – included a value of 1 (null) [ 29 ]. This can be seen as using the 95% uncertainty interval to test the null hypothesis, but perhaps we can debate whether such approach is acceptable when one believes to have met assumptions of analysis by accounting for all sources of error. This matter likely deserves an in-depth discussion to provide authors guidance in the era when analyses that account for both random and systematic errors become more accessible. When reporting or utilizing p -values, it is crucial to first consider whether their use is meaningful for the research question at hand, and to explore complementary statistical approaches where appropriate. If p -values are reported, researchers should provide the exact values rather than thresholds and always accompany them with effect sizes and confidence intervals to offer a more comprehensive understanding of the results. Additionally, interpretation should consider the study design, sample size, and the broader research context. In discussing findings, it is important to avoid simply categorizing results as “significant” or “not significant,” as this dichotomization can obscure important nuances. Ultimately, the interpretation of exposure-outcome relationships should not rely solely on statistical measures; rather, it must also incorporate prior knowledge, as well as considerations of costs, risks, and benefits. Without such contextual evaluation, neither p -values nor confidence intervals can be meaningfully interpreted, underscoring the importance of a holistic approach to statistical inference. [ 30 ] However, the information needed to properly carry out this evaluation is often lacking. Considering such gaps, an unconditional compatibility approach, such as one that emphasizes how well the observed data align with the entire set of modeling assumptions, provides a more robust interpretive framework. This perspective allows current analyses to transparently describe the data–model relationship, while remaining useful ‘in the future’ as knowledge about costs and benefits becomes more complete [ 12 ]. 4 Discussion While we identified no direct evidence that p -value misinterpretations altered causal interpretations or real-world applicability in the studies reviewed, the broader literature underscores that overreliance on statistical significance, without integration of effect sizes, clinical relevance, or bias analysis can skew conclusions. Importantly, the findings of this review apply only to the primary results as reported in published manuscripts and do not extend to the broader analytic process that generates those results. Such assumptions are not secondary to hypothesis testing, rather, they contribute as much to the resulting p -value as the target hypothesis itself and overlooking them can lead to overly optimistic interpretations [ 4 , 12 , 31 , 32 ]. Recognizing this distinction is essential for contextualizing our conclusions and for situating p -values and confidence intervals within the broader inferential framework. The relationship between epidemiology's traditional use of p -values and contemporary statistical advancements reflects both continuity and evolution. While the field has moved toward more comprehensive reporting standards such as emphasizing effect sizes, confidence intervals, and practical significance, p -values continue to serve important, if not more limited function in epidemiologic research. Notably, in our assessment, we observed several instances where p -values were used appropriately: to support trend analyses with pre-specified hypotheses and complement rather than replace other statistical measures. This demonstrates that the challenge lies not in the tool itself, but in ensuring its proper application within an increasingly sophisticated analytical toolkit. In the future, similar assessments may yield different results by including journals which do not impose guidelines on significance testing. We would expect increased instances of misinterpretation of statistical testing to be more prevalent and widespread in journals without such guidelines. We urge our colleagues to avoid using p -values and confidence intervals to characterize findings of epidemiologic investigations as either “significant” or “not significant.” Instead, we recommend focusing on the magnitude of observed effects and considering how these estimates are influenced by both random errors (which contribute to imprecision or variance) and systematic errors (which can introduce bias). Our results reveal that epidemiology is moving beyond simple dichotomies of significance to ensure more accurate and reliable interpretation of epidemiological data. The future lies in approaches that characterize the uncertainty around effect estimates by quantifying both their variability (due to random error) and potential bias (due to systematic error). In this context, it is important to consider how investigators can reduce the risk of erroneous conclusions by presenting effect estimates that explicitly account for both sources of error—whether through Bayesian posterior distributions that incorporate prior information and potential biases, or through other quantitative methods that address both variance and bias. We observed that some of our colleagues prefer to construct their causal arguments without invoking p- values and the language of “significance”, an intellectual challenge that we endorse as it leads to a greater clarity of reasoning when assessing causal claims. Our findings from leading epidemiological journals suggest that some reframing of statistical significance interpretation may be occurring in venues with rigorous editorial oversight and the peer review process. The examples of improved practices we identified, such as emphasizing effect estimates over p -values and providing nuanced interpretations of confidence intervals, represent important models for how statistical results should be communicated throughout the field. However, we acknowledge these leading journals likely represent best-case scenarios rather than typical practice, as they benefit from higher editorial standards, more thorough peer review, and potentially greater author awareness of statistical interpretation issues. Additionally, we perceive the current analytical practices as only marginally adequate. This assessment stems from the difficulty of identifying clear errors, as researchers often provide minimal interpretation of their statistical findings. Specifically, there is a tendency to report statistical results without articulating how these relate to their broader theoretical claims or contribute to the overall interpretation of their data. Our assessment is exploratory, limited by the small sample size and by restriction to these three journals. As such, this paper intends to document practices rather than to support field wide generalizations. Future work should compare venues with and without editorial restrictions on “statistical significance.” We hope that our admittedly limited effort will stimulate epidemiology journals performing self-studies on use of p -values and confidence intervals, and adjust editorial policies accordingly, if needed. The broader epidemiological literature, where most results influencing clinical practice and public health policy are published, may not reflect these improvements. Rather than indicating that epidemiology as a field is moving past significance testing problems, our findings highlight the importance of continued efforts to promote better statistical interpretation practices and demonstrate that such improvements are achievable when supported by appropriate editorial and review processes. While our study focuses on specific misinterpretations of statistical concepts in recent epidemiologic literature, it is important to recognize a deeper, underlying issue. As Greenland et al. and others have noted, the problem is not solely due to misunderstanding statistical principles, but also stems from a widespread perception of epidemiology as a field governed by straightforward, recipe-like rules. Scientific rituals, academic traditions, and prevailing values shape how statistical tools are taught, interpreted, and rewarded in the scientific community. [ [33] , [34] , [35] , [36] , [37] ] In reality, epidemiologic research is a complex and nuanced science where methods are often imperfect and necessitate critical scientific thinking. Reliance on rote application of statistical procedures, regardless of whether the “correct” rules are followed, can undermine the quality of scientific inference. True scientific rigor requires researchers to continually question assumptions, consider alternative explanations, and assess the robustness of their findings, rather than simply adhering to prescribed statistical routines. Addressing these challenges will require not only technical and methodological reforms, but also broader cultural and institutional changes within academia and scientific publishing. CRediT authorship contribution statement Montana Kekaimalu Hunter: Writing – review editing, Writing – original draft, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Anthony James Russell: Writing – review editing, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. George Maldonado: Writing – review editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Igor Burstyn: Writing – review editing, Supervision, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis. Ethics approval Ethics approval was not required for this manuscript. Funding To complete this work, MKH, AJR, and GM received research support from the Center for Truth in Science . IB did not receive funding. Declaration of competing interest The authors have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose. IB and GM held positions of Editor-In-Chief at the journal but were not involved in any decisions regarding this manuscript.