Introduction Racial and ethnic disparities in breast cancer (BC) mortality have been widely documented. Although non-Hispanic White women (NHW) are more likely to develop BC, Hispanic/Latina (H/L), non-Hispanic Black (NHB), and American Indian or Alaskan Native (AIAN) women have worse age-adjusted survival ( 1 ). In contrast, Asian American and Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander women (often grouped together as “AAPI women”) have lower age-adjusted BC mortality rates compared to NHW women; however, disaggregation of this group reveals age-adjusted mortality rates for Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders (NHPI) that are 38% higher than those of NHW women ( 2 ). NHB, H/L, AIAN, and Asian women are also more likely to experience delays in diagnosis ( 3 , 4 ), and AIAN, H/L, and NHB women present with more advanced clinical stage ( 5 – 7 ). Moreover, compared to NHW women, AIAN, H/L, and NHB women are more likely to be diagnosed with triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) ( 8 , 9 ); H/L and NHB women are also more likely to have other aggressive BC subtypes (such as estrogen receptor (ER)-negative/human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-positive BC) ( 6 , 7 , 9 , 10 ). NHB, H/L, and Asian women are more likely to experience longer delays between diagnosis and treatment ( 11 ) and NHPI and Southeast Asian women have longer delays between surgery and initiation of radiation therapy compared to NHW women ( 2 ), while AIAN, NHB, and H/L women are less likely to receive guideline concordant treatment ( 6 , 12 ). While tumor characteristics and quality of cancer care predict breast cancer outcomes ( 7 , 13 ), they do not account fully for these inequities in breast cancer mortality ( 14 ). Social determinants of health (SDOH), non-medical factors that influence health outcomes, are known to contribute to breast cancer mortality disparities (defined here as an individual’s risk of death, except where explicitly stated to refer to population-level mortality) beyond effects of clinical and pathological features ( 15 , 16 ). SDOH encompass individual, community, and societal conditions under which people are born, live, work, learn, play, and age, as well as the forces and systems that shape daily life and influence health ( 17 , 18 ). Integrating evidence from multiple academic disciplines, we propose a conceptual model that seeks to explain the mechanisms linking SDOH to BC mortality in different ethnic and racial groups ( Figure 1 ). We present evidence that structural racism and discrimination set the stage for adverse SDOH, thereby increasing exposure to unhealthy environments and states of chronic stress that produce epigenetic and/or immune dysregulation. Methods For this narrative critical review, we sought to answer the question “What are the social and biological mechanisms linking structural racism and adverse SDOH to racial and ethnic disparities in risk of breast cancer mortality?” Building on existing models linking SDOH to health outcomes (e.g. ( 19 – 23 )), we hypothesized that intermediate factors would include psychological factors, epigenetic changes, and immune system dysregulation. We searched PubMed and ScienceDirect for English-language articles using combinations of relevant terms including “structural racism”, “racial discrimination”, “social determinants of health”, “breast cancer mortality”, “breast cancer survival”, “breast cancer disparities”, “epigenetics”, “cancer immunology”, “inflammation”, “psychological stress”, as well as specific SDOH (“socioeconomic status”, “neighborhood disadvantage”, “access to care”) and terms for specific racial and ethnic minority groups in the United States (“American Indian”, “Alaskan Native”, “Asian American”, “African American”, “Black women”, “Hispanic women”, “Latina”, “Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander”); additional publications were identified through the reference lists of published articles. Abstracts of search results were reviewed for relevance, with priority given to high impact empirical papers and meta-analyses published in the past five years (2019–2024, though older publications were included where especially relevant or when the recent evidence base was limited). Searches were conducted iteratively between December 2022 – April 2024. Later iterations added the terms “environmental hazards”, “pollution”, “endocrine disruptors”, “mortgage lending discrimination”, “medical mistrust”, “financial toxicity”, “social isolation”, and “allostatic load” based on findings from earlier searches and discussions among the authorial team. Structural racism and discrimination set the stage for adverse SDOH and worse BC outcomes Structural Racism and Discrimination Longstanding historical and structural discrimination in the United States drives adverse SDOH such as economic instability and unequal access to housing, educational opportunities, and quality health care ( 24 ). Adverse SDOH driven by structural racism and discrimination, as well as other SDOH (such as social connection), have been linked with BC mortality ( 15 ). Structural discrimination refers to macro-level conditions that limit opportunities, resources, and power based on race, ethnicity, or other statuses; structural racism is the specific category of conditions that impose limitations based on race or ethnicity ( 25 ). One example is mortgage lending discrimination (or “redlining”, after the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation’s 1930s practice of outlining so-called “less desirable” neighborhoods in red on housing market maps ( 26 )) which enforces neighborhood-level segregation ( 26 ). Racially segregated communities often experience additional neighborhood disadvantages such as lower quality schools and lower access to employment opportunities ( 27 ); residents of segregated neighborhoods are less likely to receive guideline-concordant care for BC ( 12 ) and experience higher mortality ( 28 ). For AIAN women and other minoritized groups living in rural areas, geographic access to quality cancer care is often limited by transportation barriers ( 29 , 30 ). Individuals residing in disadvantaged neighborhoods also have increased exposure to unhealthy environments ( 31 ). Structural racism can also limit employment options, impacting individual and family socioeconomic status (SES) ( 24 ). Notably, NHB and H/L women with breast cancer report substantial higher medical debt and greater likelihood of foregoing care because of cost relative to NHW women. Spanish-speaking H/L women were nearly three times more likely than NHW women to report care-related financial decline ( 32 ). Individual and area-level persistent poverty are associated with lower rates of cancer screening and preventive care, which may result in delays in treatment ( 33 ) and increased population-level BC-related mortality rates ( 34 ). Due in part to economic, insurance, and/or transportation barriers to care ( 35 ), NHB and H/L patients are less likely to receive care at National Cancer Institute (NCI) designated cancer centers ( 36 ) which has been associated with lower mortality rates ( 35 ), and AIAN patients are more likely to receive care at rural hospitals ( 37 ). For example, a study of patients receiving care at a single NCI-designated comprehensive cancer center found that NHB patients were more likely to have received initial care elsewhere compared to NHW patients, and H/L patients were more likely to present at later stages compared to non-Hispanic patients ( 38 ). Geographic distance presents a complication when multiple visits are required for treatment, and rurality as well as area SES are associated with lower odds of receiving guideline-concordant oncologist visits ( 12 ). NCI-designated centers have begun to place greater urgency on addressing barriers to care as part of community outreach efforts only in the past five years; however, results of these efforts are slow to realize ( 39 ). Moreover, self-reported mistrust of the medical establishment and perceived discrimination influence where care is received and perceived quality of care ( 29 , 40 ). In the Equality in Breast Cancer Care study, women of any race who reported experiencing discrimination or any degree of medical mistrust reported lower perceived quality of care ( 40 ); self-reported medical mistrust is also associated with underutilization of treatment ( 41 ). Medical mistrust contributes to lower breast cancer screening adherence among NHB women ( 42 ), and AIAN women may be more likely to seek traditional healers based on the history of injustices committed by federal health services ( 29 ). Based on the neighborhood disadvantages outlined in this section (including lower quality education and employment options, limited access to health care, geographic and transportation barriers, and increased exposure to unhealthy environments), it is not surprising that women residing in redlined and disadvantaged neighborhoods have worse BC-related mortality outcomes compared to those from other neighborhoods ( 43 ); this is particularly true among NHB women and H/L women ( 44 ). Increased BC mortality has also been associated with neighborhood level measures of residential crowding, poverty level, and rurality ( 45 ). Neighborhood disadvantage based on census tract levels of SES has also been linked with less favorable tumor profiles (such as ER-negative BC) among NHB women ( 46 ), with greater risk of TNBC among women of any race or ethnicity ( 47 ), and with higher all-cause and BC-related mortality among women with BC ( 45 ). SES and access to care do not fully explain BC mortality disparities Racial and ethnic disparities in BC mortality tend to be reduced, but not always eliminated, after adjusting for individual SES and neighborhood disadvantage. In one study, AIAN, H/L, and NHB women were more likely to present with later stage at diagnosis compared to NHW women, but these differences disappeared after controlling for SES and health insurance status ( 48 ). Another study using the NCI Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) registry found that a composite measure of neighborhood disadvantage based on area SES and insurance status mediated only 19% of the disparity in BC mortality between NHB and NHW women with early-stage hormone receptor (HR) positive BC ( 16 ). Together, these studies suggest that SES may play a stronger role in influencing stage at presentation, while other factors remain important to mortality outcomes. Unequal access to care, defined here as either geographic distance from quality medical facilities, insurance coverage, or transportation barriers, has an adverse impact on population-level mortality in AIAN, H/L, and NHB women ( 49 ). Compared to NHW and Asian adults, AIAN, H/L, NHB, and NHPI groups have higher rates of uninsured adults and adults with public insurance ( 50 ), which have been associated with higher risk of mortality ( 51 ). AIAN women who live on reservation lands may have to travel long distances to obtain a diagnosis or access specialty care such as oncological treatment, while AIAN women in urban areas may lack access to Indian Health Service practices ( 29 , 52 ). Conversely, NHB women with equal access to care through the US military health care system had similar breast cancer-specific mortality rates to NHW women despite a higher prevalence of later stage, higher grade, and HR-negative or triple negative tumors ( 53 ). Below we propose additional mechanisms that may mediate adverse impacts of structural racism and SDOH on breast cancer mortality in minoritized groups. Environmental factors that may explain disparities in BC mortality Minoritized groups are more likely to be exposed to environmental carcinogens As proposed in Figure 1 , the downstream adverse impacts of structural racist practices on inequities in breast cancer mortality may be mediated in part by differential exposure to environmental hazards. As a result of racist policies which focused pollution-generating roadways and facilities in minority communities, low SES and racial and ethnic minority communities are exposed to higher levels of air pollution ( 54 ) and are more likely to be located near polluting industrial facilities ( 55 ). Large population-based studies have shown that higher exposure to airborne pollution is associated with increased mortality among women with BC ( 54 , 56 ). Historical abrogations of treaty rights for AIAN nations resulted in extensive mining operations on tribal lands, with impacts continuing today in the form of increased exposure to toxic metals in contaminated water and soil ( 57 ); although the effects of heavy metal exposure on BC mortality in AIAN populations have not been clearly examined, residential proximity to mines has been associated with increased BC mortality in other populations ( 58 ). Other environmental hazards include exposure to endocrine disrupting chemicals, a class of compounds which influence hormonal signaling relevant for BC. Endocrine disruptors include industrial pollutants such as polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), organochlorine pesticides used in agriculture, and phthalates and parabens found in hair care products that disproportionately affect NHB women ( 59 ). A toxicology analysis of data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) found higher levels of several chemicals with known BC-associated activity (including parabens) in samples from NHB women compared to NHW women ( 60 ). A study of regional racial variation in exposure to 11 kinds of PFAS found that perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) was present at higher concentrations in biospecimens from NHB women compared to NHW women in Southeast Michigan and Boston; Chinese women (in Oakland, CA) and Japanese women (in Los Angeles, CA) had higher concentrations of perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA) compared to NHW women, while NHW women had higher concentrations of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) compared to Chinese and NHB women in these regions ( 61 ). Endocrine disrupting chemicals are linked with BC risk ( 62 ), however, less is known about potential impacts on BC-related mortality. For example, higher PCB concentrations in blood were associated with greater risk of BC-specific mortality ( 63 ). In the Long Island Breast Cancer Study Project, urinary concentrations of parabens were inversely associated with all-cause mortality but not associated with BC-specific mortality ( 64 ), whereas urinary concentrations of phthalate metabolites were positively associated with BC-specific mortality ( 65 ). A study of 3,316 women with BC in a single county found that a census tract-level measure of cumulative hazard exposure (including environmental hazards as well as rates of unhealthy alcohol use, metabolic dysfunction, and breastfeeding) was associated with increased odds of TNBC; further, census tracts with higher cumulative risk scores also had higher proportions of NHB residents ( 66 ). Environmental impact on physical activity and access to healthy food as a mediator of SDOH on BC mortality Low SES and neighborhood disadvantage may also impact BC mortality through access to green space recreational areas ( 67 ) and access to healthy food ( 68 ). In the United States, racial and ethnic minorities are less likely to have access to green space compared to NHW ( 67 ); predominantly minority neighborhoods have less green space than predominantly NHW neighborhood ( 69 ). Green space can include outdoor recreational areas such as park trails which provide opportunities for physical activity. Low physical activity is linked to greater individual BC mortality ( 70 ) and to population-level racial and ethnic disparities in mortality ( 71 ). Neighborhood disadvantage is also associated with lower access to healthy foods (i.e., food deserts and food swamps) and greater risk of food insecurity ( 72 , 73 ). Studies have found that NHB, H/L, and AIAN adults in the US experience food insecurity at twice the rates of NHW adults ( 72 , 74 ). Both food insecurity and residence in a food desert have been associated with greater mortality in women with BC ( 68 ). Environmental barriers to healthy eating may contribute to poor diet quality ( 75 ) and to higher rates of obesity among H/L and NHB women ( 76 ), a known risk factor associated with reduced efficacy for endocrine therapy ( 77 , 78 ), higher risk of surgical complications ( 79 ), and greater risk of recurrence and mortality among women with BC ( 78 , 80 ). Psychological stress as a mediator of the impact of SDOH on BC mortality Self-reported psychological stress Psychological stress may mediate the adverse impacts of structural racism and adverse SDOH on BC mortality. Psychological stress is a broad term referring to psychological responses to an individual’s ongoing relationship with their environment, particularly under circumstances that are difficult or where demands exceed resources ( 81 ). Measures such as number of stressful events, personality (e.g., neuroticism), mood symptoms (depression, anxiety), or self-reported stress may all be grouped under “psychological stress” ( 82 , 83 ). The wide range of measures reflects both the variety of available stressors as well as ongoing debate over optimal measurement approaches ( 81 ), which can present a challenge to attempts to compare findings across studies. Structural racism, neighborhood disadvantage, and low individual SES are associated with psychological stress ( 84 ). From a systems perspective, structural racism is part of a multi-level system of cultural and societal racial discrimination and leads to repeated personal experience of perceived discrimination for disadvantaged groups ( 85 ). Unsurprisingly, the experience of perceived racial discrimination is associated with higher ratings on measures of psychological stress across racial and ethnic minority groups, including acculturative stress in AIAN adults ( 86 ), racism-related stress in Asian adults ( 87 ), psychological distress in H/L adults ( 88 ), perceived stress in Native Hawaiians ( 89 ), and psychological distress in NHB adults ( 90 ). Cancer treatment and associated side effects can also increase psychological stress, which can impact treatment adherence: a retrospective study of women receiving adjuvant endocrine therapy for BC found that observations of lower adherence among NHB women compared to NHW women were mediated by greater psychological distress and higher symptom severity among NHB women, and that adjusting for psychological symptoms reversed the racial association with adherence (NHB women showed higher adherence than NHW women) ( 91 ). Psychological stress can increase risk of mortality for women with BC; for example, a study using data from women with BC who participated in the National Health Interview Survey found that women who reported higher psychological stress at the baseline interview (which may have been before or after BC diagnosis) had a 46% increase risk of all-cause mortality over the 17-year study period ( 92 ). Adverse SDOH are linked to higher perceived stress and more stressful life events for those that are exposed. For example, the Americans Changing Lives survey, a longitudinal cohort of adults age 25 and older in the U.S., found that individuals in the lowest education and income categories reported significantly higher chronic stress and a larger number of negative life events ( 93 ). Neighborhood disadvantage also contributes to perceived stress; a cohort study of NHB breast cancer survivors found a positive correlation between neighborhood visual cues of physical disorder (such as visible litter or buildings in poor condition) and perceived stress, which was attenuated by visual cues associated with greater neighborhood engagement (outdoor seating, team sports equipment, etc) ( 94 ). Further, experiences of perceived racism can in themselves be considered stressful life events ( 95 ). Experiencing stressful life events may be linked to adverse BC outcomes; however, the associations are not as clear as those for perceived stress. An increase in the number of stressful life events has been associated with increased risk of BC recurrence ( 96 ); however, others have found no association between stressful life events and progression or survival ( 97 ). Social isolation Subjective and objective measures of individual social isolation have been associated consistently with an increased likelihood of BC mortality. Women with BC who live alone ( 98 ) and those who report having a smaller social network are at higher risk of BC recurrence and BC-related mortality ( 99 ). Racism and discrimination may contribute to social isolation for racial and ethnic minorities; for example, among NHB adults more frequent experiences of discrimination were associated with higher subjective and objective measures of social isolation ( 100 ). In contrast, strong social ties may act as a buffer to the effects of perceived discrimination on health outcomes ( 101 ). Social network size, network density, and practical support are negatively associated with BC mortality and mediate some disparities in mortality between NHB and NHW women ( 102 ). NHB women in this study had higher risk of BC-related mortality, were less likely to be married and reported slightly fewer friends who could help with practical support compared to NHW women; after adjusting for covariates, unmet practical support remained positively associated with breast cancer mortality while the association between race and mortality was no longer significant ( 102 ). Race and ethnicity may also play a role in the types of social support that women rely on: a study of N = 9,267 women with BC from three pooled cohort studies found that lower community ties and lack of a spouse or partner predicted mortality only in older NHW women, whereas lower friendship ties and lack of relatives predicted mortality in non-White women ( 99 ). Biological mechanisms link external factors to BC disparities Allostatic load links cumulative impact of stress to BC mortality One approach to measuring the physiological impact of cumulative stress exposure is to assess allostatic load, a composite measure of biomarkers of activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, sympathetic adrenal medullary pathway activation, and tertiary outcomes (such as disease) ( 103 ). Although there is not one standard approach to calculating allostatic load, the measure frequently includes markers of neuroendocrine response (such as cortisol, epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dehydroepiandrosterone), inflammation (c-reactive protein (CRP)), metabolic processes (total cholesterol, high density lipoprotein, triglycerides, hemoglobin A1c, albumin, body mass index, and waist-to-hip ratio), and cardiovascular processes (systolic and diastolic blood pressure) ( 104 ). Allostatic load is increased in residents of areas with greater environmental and social stressors, and women may be particularly sensitive to these effects ( 105 ). Perceived racial discrimination has also been shown to increase allostatic load in AIAN, H/L, and NHB adults ( 106 – 108 ). Allostatic load is higher among women with BC residing in neighborhoods with higher levels of racial and economic segregation compared to those in less segregated neighborhoods ( 109 ), and higher allostatic load is associated with increased risk of all-cause mortality ( 109 , 110 ). Among over 4,000 women with BC receiving surgical treatment at a single institution, those who were single, on Medicaid, or identified as NHB had higher allostatic load than those who were partnered, had private insurance, or NHW, respectively ( 110 ). Further, a study of 934 women with newly diagnosed BC found that allostatic load was higher among NHB and H/L women compared to NHW women, and among NHB women, higher allostatic load was associated with higher likelihood of having ER-negative tumors (which typically present a worse prognosis compared to ER-positive tumors) ( 111 ). A limitation of using allostatic load as a biomarker is that calculation of allostatic load has not been standardized, and different studies have used different combinations of biomarkers to represent the effects of stress on cardiovascular, metabolic, and immune systems ( 104 ). Epigenetic dysregulation, BC mortality, and SDOH Epigenetic alterations (heritable modifications to DNA and associated proteins that alter gene expression, such as DNA methylation and histone modification) play a crucial role in the regulation of BC and transition to metastatic phenotypes with important molecular subtype specifications ( 112 ). Increased expression of and gene polymorphisms in DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) and increased expression of DNA demethylases (e.g., ten-eleven translocation family enzymes, or TETs) are associated with breast oncogenesis ( 113 ). Breast cancer has been linked with global DNA hypomethylation ( 114 ), which is known to increase genomic instability and expression of tumor-promoting genes ( 115 ), as well as focal and gene-specific promoter hypermethylation resulting in downregulation of tumor-suppressing genes ( 116 ); these are shared traits among most cancers. Post-translational modifications of histone proteins by a plethora of histone modifying enzymes (including histone acetyltransferase (HAT), histone deacetylase (HDAC), histone methyltransferases (HMT) and histone methyldetransferases (HDMT)) also influence gene expression. Altered expression of histone modifiers is associated with BC tumor characteristics ( 117 ) including factors that contribute to progression and metastasis ( 118 , 119 ). Low SES ( 120 ), neighborhood disadvantage/contemporary redlining ( 121 ), and perceived racial discrimination ( 122 ) have been linked to changes in DNA methylation patterns; typically these studies find a pattern of global hypomethylation in exposed adults ( 123 ), which as described above may contribute to genomic instability ( 115 ). One study observed that DNA methylation changes in breast tumor tissue were associated with neighborhood-level socioeconomic measures (job density and education) ( 124 ). Epigenome-wide analysis of breast tumor tissue from NHB and NHW women identified five loci with DNA hypermethylation associated with contemporary redlining; these loci were located in genes involved in tumor suppression, inflammation, immune function, and stress response ( PCDH9 , ANGPT1 , PRG4 , RBMS3 ) ( 121 ). In tumor tissue from breast cancer patients, an epigenome-wide analysis identified 25 loci associated with household income; methylation rates were lower among women with lower family income ( 125 ). Two of the most strongly correlated sites were located in promoter regions of genes involved in stress signaling and inflammatory response ( NNT ) and neurological and immune response ( GPR37 ); hypomethylation of these genes was associated with higher gene expression ( 125 ). However, single gene findings have primarily been noted in individual studies; additional validation is necessary for a more complete understanding of these relationships. Immune dysregulation, BC mortality, and SDOH The involvement of the immune system in BC pathology, treatment response, and mortality is well documented. Inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin (IL) 6, IL-1β, and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) regulate immune cells in the tumor microenvironment (TME) such as TH1 cytokines, cytotoxic T cells, natural killer (NK) cells, regulatory T cells and tumor associated macrophages (TAMs) ( 126 ); downregulation of protective cells and upregulation of immunosuppressive cells are associated with decreased ability to mount an immune response to tumor cells ( 127 ) as well as decreased overall survival and shorter disease-free survival in patients with BC ( 128 ). Higher levels of CRP, a biomarker of systemic inflammation, are associated with worse prognosis in patients with BC ( 129 ), and chronic inflammation, marked by elevated levels of IL-6, IL-1B, and TNFα, promotes tumor growth and metastasis ( 130 ). Conversely, higher levels of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) in the TME are associated with better response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy across all subtypes, and with longer disease-free survival in TNBC and HER2-positive (but not HER2-negative) BC ( 131 ). These markers of chronic inflammation linked to BC outcomes are elevated in individuals exposed to adverse SDOH. Low SES and lack of social support have been linked to elevated CRP and IL-6 ( 132 , 133 ). Greater neighborhood disadvantage has been associated with elevated CRP in NHW and NHB adults ( 134 ), higher CRP and soluble intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (sICAM-1) in Mexican American women ( 135 ), and higher CRP, IL-6, and soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 (sTNFR-2) in health professionals ( 136 ). Environmental exposures are linked to epigenetic changes and immune dysregulation Biological pathways linking environmental exposures to BC mortality also rely on epigenetic and immune mechanisms. Exposure to environmental hazards such as air pollution is associated with global DNA hypomethylation ( 137 ) and increased levels of IL-6, IL-1β, TNF-α, and circulating monocytes (CD14+, CD16+, CD4+, CD8+) ( 138 ). Specific BC-related genes may also be affected: for example, exposure to ambient air pollution in childhood was associated with hypermethylation of SYK (a tumor suppressor) and hypomethylation of SCGB3A1 ( HIN-1 , associated with hormone receptor status and progression) in breast tumor tissue in the Western New York Exposures and Breast Cancer Study ( 139 ). The physical effects of green space access and physical activity may be mediated by epigenetic alterations as well. Lower exposure to urban green space was associated with more rapid epigenetic aging (based on GrimAge, a composite measure of age-related changes in DNA methylation), and this association was stronger in adults who lived in disadvantaged neighborhoods ( 140 ). A candidate gene methylation study found that low physical activity was associated with lower mortality in women with BC, but only in those with methylated promoter regions for BC-related genes ( 141 ). Biological effects of stress are linked to epigenetic changes and immune dysregulation Increasingly, psychological stress is recognized to be associated with epigenetic patterns that may impact racial and ethnic disparities in BC outcomes ( 142 ). Psychological stress triggers a physiologic response by the HPA axis involving the release of glucocorticoids and catecholamines such as noradrenaline and adrenaline. Preclinical work shows that chronic exposure to glucocorticoid signaling at levels corresponding to a physiologic stress response results in epigenetic changes associated with cell proliferation and migration in human fibroblasts ( 143 ), and in hypomethylation resulting in downregulation of tumor suppressor genes in TNBC cells and mice exposed to chronic restraint stress ( 144 ); the same exposure resulted in hypomethylation of the ESR1 gene leading to upregulation of ERα, suggesting that chronic stress could change the phenotype of breast cancer tumors ( 144 ). In humans, a study of 906 patients with newly diagnosed BC found that high neighborhood disadvantage (measured by the Area Deprivation Index) was associated with lower global DNA methylation and higher allostatic load (a biomarker of higher chronic stress as described above) ( 123 ). Patients in this study from disadvantaged neighborhoods were more likely to be NHB and more likely to have higher grade and poorly differentiated breast tumors ( 123 ). Candidate gene methylation studies have shown that NR3C1 , a gene encoding glucocorticoid receptors, was hypermethylated in breast cancer tumors compared to normal breast tissue, resulting in reduced expression of glucocorticoid receptor in tumor tissue ( 145 ); further, expression of NR3C1 was reduced in patients with metastatic compared to non-metastatic disease, in grade III tumors compared to grade II, and in ER-negative tumors compared to ER-positive ( 146 ). Genes encoding the oxytocin receptor ( OXTR ) and serotonin receptor ( 5-HTT ) also had lower expression in patients with metastatic BC compared to earlier stages ( 146 ). Importantly, downregulation of each of these three genes was associated with shorter survival times ( 146 ). Psychological stress is also closely linked to immune system regulation through the functions of the HPA axis ( 147 ). Glucocorticoids and catecholamines released in response to stress promote the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines as well as the release and redistribution of leukocytes. Chronic stress has been associated with a blunted cortisol response which is associated with increased levels of inflammatory markers ( 148 ); over time, chronic stress results in chronic inflammation, which influences cancer outcomes as described above. Studies in BC survivors show blunted cortisol responses (diurnal response or response to an acute stressor) ( 149 , 150 ), which were associated with increased inflammatory response in survivors with persistent fatigue ( 150 ). Another study showed that the number of reported stressful life events was negatively correlated with cortisol response to a social stressor in BC survivors, but not in women with no history of cancer ( 151 ). Perceived discrimination has been associated with higher concentrations of E-selectin and IL-6 ( 152 ) and increased activity of transcription factors involved in pro-inflammatory (NF-κB, AP-1) and stress response pathways (CREB, GR) ( 153 ). One study showed that perceived racial discrimination modulates cortisol levels and immune responses to acute stress in NHB individuals; participants who reported higher perceived discrimination had lower baseline cortisol and a blunted response to a stressor as well as higher levels of CRP afterwards ( 154 ). In contrast, stress-associated impairment of immune function (evidenced by higher rates of infections during chemotherapy) in women with BC is mitigated by self-reported social support from a spouse ( 155 ). Epigenetic and immune dysregulation are linked to racial and ethnic disparities Epigenetic and immune differences have been linked to racial and ethnic disparities in BC outcomes ( 156 , 157 ). Several studies have observed a greater number of loci with racial differences in methylation among more aggressive ER-negative tumors compared to ER-positive ( 157 – 159 ). A candidate gene methylation study using tumor tissue from n = 67 NHB and n = 44 NHW women found significantly higher methylation of HIN-1 , Twist , Cyclin D2 , and RASSF1A in NHB women compared to NHW women, but only in the subgroup of women under age 50 with ER/progesterone receptor (PR)-negative tumors ( 158 ). Examination of DNA methylation in breast tumor tissue from participants in the Carolina Breast Cancer Study showed significant differences in DNA methylation between breast tumors from NHB women (n = 216) and NHW women (n = 301) at 7 loci that did not overlap already known sequence variants or show ancestral population differences 10%, including loci in DSC2 , KCNK4 , GSTM1 , HBII-52 , AXL , DNAJC15 , and TES; an additional four loci ( TUSC3 , RAF1 , SMARCA3 , and IMPACT ) were identified which showed significant racial variation among the subset of women with HR-negative tumors ( 157 ). Another study observed hypermethylation of GSTM2 in ER/PR-negative BC tumors compared to ER/PR-positive tumors, and found that NHB women were more likely than NHW and H/L women to show hypermethylation of this promoter region and also to have ER/PR-negative tumors, suggesting that aberrant DNA methylation may contribute to the prevalence of more aggressive subtypes in NHB women ( 160 ). In contrast, another genome-wide methylation study found a pattern of overall hypermethylation at CpG islands (CGI) and hypomethylation outside of CGI in breast tumor tissue compared to normal breast tissue, and higher methylation at CGI in ER-positive tumors compared to ER-negative; trends were similar in samples from NHB and NHW women ( 159 ). Further evidence supports the premise that differences in immune regulation and immune cell expression in the TME contribute to racial and ethnic disparities in BC outcomes. A study in 21 women with BC (n = 11 NHB and n = 10 NHW) found that serum samples from NHB women showed higher expression of two cytokines, resistin and IL-6, which were shown to promote BC cell growth and aggressive phenotype through upregulation of the STAT3 pathway ( 161 ); resistin expression was more than four times higher in tumors from NHB women compared to NHW women ( 162 ). Racial and ethnic differences in immunosuppressive cell density have also been reported. One study found higher counts of proliferating cell nuclear antigen positive (PCNA+) TAMs (linked to high risk HR-negative BC) in tumors from non-NHW women compared to NHW women; elevated counts were associated with shorter progression-free survival, particularly among H/L women ( 163 ). A study of tumor samples from 150 women with BC showed that higher densities of CD163+ TAMs and crown-like structures were associated with higher overall mortality, and NHB women had higher densities of these cell types compared to NHW and H/L women ( 164 ). NHB women were also found to have higher a higher density of cytotoxic CD8+ T cells compared to NHW women, with the highest densities occurring in NHB women with TNBC; there were no overall associations between CD8+ cell density and overall mortality, but there was a trend toward better overall survival in NHB women with TNBC who had high CD8+ cell density compared to low ( 156 ). However, another study using gene expression data from The Cancer Genome Atlas found no significant differences in expression of genes related to the immune system or in TIL counts between NHB and NHW women with TNBC ( 165 ). There is also evidence supporting higher levels of immune suppression as a mechanism of resistance to approved immune therapies used to treat BC, such as immune checkpoint inhibition ( 166 ). Taken together, these studies suggest that immune cell expression may differ by race, but that associations between immune cell expression and mortality may depend on BC subtype. Additional research is needed to better understand the links between racial and ethnic background, the tumor-immune microenvironment, and disparities in mortality. Racial and ethnic differences in the tumor-immune microenvironment could influence future clinical trial design and as a result guide use and approval of novel immunotherapies. Conceptual model of the impact of racism on BC mortality disparities Based on the research described above, we describe a model that links racism to BC mortality disparities through multiple pathways ( Figure 2 ( 167 )). Structural racism and racial discrimination contribute to adverse SDOH including both individual and neighborhood-level disadvantage and reduced social support, and also have an adverse effect on psychological health through exposure to perceived discrimination and increased social isolation. Direct impacts of SDOH on access to care partially explain disparities and are joined by environmental and psychological impacts of adverse SDOH. These in turn are linked to BC outcomes through biological effects on allostatic load, epigenetic changes that promote tumor growth and metastasis, and immune dysregulation that lowers protective immunity, resulting in racial and ethnic disparities in BC recurrence and ultimately in increased risk of mortality among racial and ethnic minority women. This model builds on prior conceptual models linking SDOH to health outcomes, such as the Cells to Society model developed by the Centers for Population Health and Health Disparities (CPHHD) ( 19 ), the Racism and Health model ( 20 ), and others ( 21 , 22 ). Like these models, we identify structural racism and racial discrimination as fundamental factors underlying more intermediate (adverse SDOH, psychological factors, environmental factors) and proximal (low access to care, biological mechanisms) determinants of disparities. We build on these models by tracing specific direct and indirect pathways which may lead to racial disparities in BC outcomes, with a focus on the pathways most relevant to BC biology and to racial disparities in risk of BC mortality. The proposed model permits clear identification of distinct avenues for intervention and will facilitate future research by suggesting appropriate intermediate outcomes along each pathway. Strengths and Limitations of the Proposed Model A strength of this model is the wealth of evidence linking each step in the chain from adverse SDOH to mortality disparities. Limitations exist, however, in the availability of studies demonstrating biological mediation. This problem is exacerbated by the underrepresentation of racial and ethnic minorities in cancer studies, which leads to small group sizes that pose challenges for examining interaction and within-group effects. AIAN women are often included in broader minority categories, and thus there has been limited research on underlying epigenetic and immune contributors to the observed higher mortality rates in AIAN women with BC. Large racially and ethnically diverse studies that are well-powered to assess mechanisms in one or more specific groups will be necessary in order to more fully explore the mechanisms linking SDOH and racial disparities. More research is also needed to clarify the specific biological changes wrought by epigenetic alterations in order to identify potential targets for interventions. Replication of epigenetic and immune findings is limited; validation will be necessary in order to identify specific biomarkers that may be most relevant. Further, the most effective interventions will require community-based participatory research in order to achieve optimal results. Future Directions The proposed model potentially addresses one of the challenges of assessing interventions to reduce BC outcome disparities; namely, the long timeline required to observe the effects. Epigenetic and immune biomarkers may present intermediate markers of effects which could be observed over a shorter period. However, more research is needed to solidify the relationships between SDOH, specific biomarkers, and mortality outcomes; to determine whether interventions have the power to alter these markers; and to determine the timeline on which clinically relevant changes may be observed. A number of interventions to address SDOH-related disparities are in development: for example, patient navigation programs address barriers to care and have been shown improve screening adherence and receipt of recommended care for medically underserved patients ( 168 ); group physical activity interventions may show greater benefits and additionally provide a source of social connection for women of racial and ethnic minority groups ( 169 ); and interventions designed to increase social support show promise for reducing mortality among women with stage I and II BC ( 170 ). However, few of these interventions have examined impact on epigenetic patterns or immune regulation. Trials of psychological stress reduction interventions for BC patients have shown positive effects on mental health and reduced mortality ( 171 ) and on intermediate measures such as reduced transcription activity in pathways related to stress, pro-inflammatory signaling, and pro-malignant signaling ( 172 ). The proposed model highlights other potential interventions that have not yet been explored; for example, environmental remediation steps, such as clean air policies or reductions in industrial pollution, have the potential to improve BC-related mortality disparities, but to our knowledge no studies to date have examined the impact of environmental remediation or environmental equity initiatives on BC outcomes. Conclusions Although ultimately addressing the racial and ethnic disparities in BC outcomes in the US will require large scale social justice reforms, understanding the mechanisms by which SDOH and psychosocial factors influence BC will help researchers and clinicians develop targeted interventions to reduce recurrence risk and improve survival for women impacted by structural racism and adverse SDOH. However, there is a dearth of large studies with sufficiently comprehensive data (including lifetime SDOH, epigenetic analysis, and biomarkers of immune response) to fully demonstrate mediation. Future research on this topic would benefit from large, well designed cohort studies conducted with racially and ethnically diverse participants in order to better understand the relationships between structural racism, SDOH, chronic stress, immune dysregulation, and BC disparities. A better understanding of these relationships may enable development of a priority list of adverse SDOH which would provide the greatest reduction in disparities if corrected and identify opportunities for intervention at optimal points on the pathways. Interventional research should proactively engage community members through a community-based participatory research approach to optimize the impact of the intervention.