Key Points We outline a three-stage framework; information gathering, cross-product comparison, and creation of conservative, non-brand guidance. This standardises how treatment side effects are managed across trials while preserving room for clinical judgement. Applied to antibody–drug conjugates, the framework turns complex, variable guidance into clear, action-oriented steps for key risks. This supports faster, safer decisions at trial sites. The model builds in practical considerations such as disease setting, patient factors, and regional practice. It is also kept current through periodic updates, helping ensure global usability and better patient experience. Introduction The Global Patient Safety function within AstraZeneca develops the safety strategy and pharmacovigilance of products across their lifecycle, starting prior to the first-in-human clinical trials and continuing beyond commercialisation. Adopting a scientific approach, Global Patient Safety performs safety surveillance, signal management decisions, and benefit–risk evaluations. During the establishment of the clinical development programme for an investigational medicinal product (IMP), a safety strategy must be designed by anticipating potential safety concerns, understanding their possible consequences, and proactively developing management plans to address them. In doing so, it is important to consider the impact of additional risk mitigation protocols on overall patient burden. As described in ICH E6 (R3) Step 2 [ 1 ], a trial sponsor “should incorporate quality into the design of the clinical trial by identifying factors that are critical to the quality of the trial and by managing risks to those factors”. In the context of early-phase clinical trials, it is imperative that toxicities are managed by following evidence-based, effective guidelines. Toxicity management guidelines (TMGs) can be described as part of the study protocol and may include the availability of specific antidotes where they exist with a clear plan of supportive treatment [ 2 ]. Effectiveness of TMGs in clinical trials can impact regulatory submission outcomes for new indications, future clinical development milestones (such as phase completion), and benefit–risk ratios. AstraZeneca Oncology TMGs provide specific recommendations for managing adverse effects or toxicities associated with an IMP by outlining the appropriate dose adjustments, supportive care, and if necessary, drug discontinuation criteria. It is paramount for the patients in clinical studies that possible adverse effects are monitored to detect toxicities early and allow rapid clinical intervention to appropriately manage and/or mitigate the risk. The TMGs are a key piece in achieving this, ensuring that patients who do experience a toxicity receive optimal care. TMGs are refined as the IMP progresses through clinical development and the overall understanding of the safety profile evolves. Ultimately, the guidance included in the TMGs can be used to inform what is included in the product label and Patient Information Leaflet (PIL) upon marketing authorisation. This ensures that patients remain protected, with their adverse event–derived symptoms adequately managed beyond the controlled clinical trial environment, highlighting the importance of a holistic and proactive pharmacovigilance approach across the product lifecycle. Antibody–drug conjugates (ADCs) are designed to be targeted cancer therapies that combine an antibody with a cytotoxic drug, connected by a linker. The antibody serves as a delivery mechanism, targeting the drug directly to cancer cells via tumour surface antigens, which helps to minimise toxicity to healthy cells [ 3 ]. The lifetime probability of cancer diagnosis is 1 in 2 for men and 1 in 3 for women [ 4 ], highlighting the importance and unmet need for better cancer therapies, of which ADCs are a growing focus for many pharmaceutical companies. The ADC development pipeline is a competitive and exciting area of oncology, with high potential to positively impact patient outcomes. For example, a wide range of payloads and antibodies are being investigated within AstraZeneca alone, and specificities of TMGs between each product can vary depending on the IMP and class or indication in question. This raises a challenge for the development of new ADC TMGs. Moreover, this leaves a degree of ambiguity for investigators, especially those involved in several studies with several products, as each IMP has a unique set of TMGs for similar toxicities. Thus, it is important to standardise processes for the development of TMGs, ensuring they are easy to follow and that patients always receive the best care regardless of the IMP or study they are on. Ultimately, a standardised process increases the likelihood of meaningful trial outcomes by ensuring patient safety, optimising treatment adherence, and even enhancing data reliability by encouraging uniformity in how AEs are reported and managed across multiple trial sites. ADCs have several safety-related considerations such as structure, including individual payload, linker and antibody target. In addition, membrane permeability of the drug payload is an important aspect for bystander toxicity. Therefore, developing de novo safety strategies for these products can be complex and time consuming. Adding to this, variation in existing TMGs presents challenges to teams tasked with authoring them for a new study or product. This highlights a need for a set of standardised, payload class–based (e.g. Topoisomerase-1 inhibitor [Topo1i] ADC) TMGs that has been carefully curated to provide a comprehensive starting point when designing TMGs to complement a study protocol. Having a pre-prepared, ‘off-the-shelf’ document based on the latest understanding of best clinical practice means time and resource can be saved, redirecting focus onto characterising the IMP’s safety profile and patient population to understand if more specific safety measures are required. A recommended, non-mandated approach to standard toxicity management is critical to support the current accelerated development of ADCs within the oncology space. To address the above challenge, the authors set out to develop a methodology that would overcome the variation identified between current AstraZeneca ADC TMGs, a template framework which can be adapted and utilised across any class of IMPs. TMGs were standardised for a variety of toxicities, providing a basis which can be customised for specific risks for the individual ADC products. The aim was to consolidate existing TMGs based on medical and scientific rationale and best clinical practice in order to provide a standardised TMG guidance for new product teams to support First Time in Human (FTIH) study start-up and for ongoing clinical trials. This article outlines the methodology used to create standardised TMGs for the Topo1i ADC class. ADCs were chosen for this methodology for a variety of reasons, including their priority in the AZ oncology development portfolio, the fact that they are an evolving class of medicines, and the need for education on and standardisation of treatment requirements for risks that are often not routinely observed in oncology trials, such as ocular toxicities. The reader is guided through the methodological approach including the sources of information used for data collection and review, identification of differences between current TMGs, and rationalisation of these before consolidation and creation of standardised wording. The considerations and limitations of this methodology are also discussed in detail. Successful implementation of this methodology within the ADC class—and indeed across any class of IMPs—will aid clinical study success and improve trial participant outcomes. Methodological Flow for Developing and Standardising Trial Management Guidelines (TMGs) A basic overview of the approach used for this methodology is illustrated in Fig. 1 . Fig. 1 Methodological flow for developing and standardising Trial Management Guidelines (TMGs). The diagram illustrates three sequential stages used to generate standardised toxicity management text across Investigational Medicinal Products (IMPs) within a product class. (1) Information gathering: For each IMP, collate all safety-relevant sources to establish the evidence base, including current TMGs; internal documents (CSP, IB, CCDS); in-class drug labels (SmPC, USPI); practice guidelines (e.g. CTCAE for grading, NCCN for management); and class-effect literature review. (2) Cross-product comparison: Align TMG content across products by toxicity and CTCAE grade, comparing dose modification and toxicity management. Highlight convergence and divergence, then investigate any differences; retain product-specific guidance only when a clear medical/scientific rationale exists. (3) Standardised TMG creation: Where no product-specific rationale is found, draft conservative, globally applicable guidance for each toxicity and grade, using non-brand terminology (e.g., ‘appropriate anti-emetic’). Apply final text with consideration of study population, indication, and patient burden. ASCO American Society of Clinical Oncology, CTCAE Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, DLT dose-limiting toxicity, G-CSF granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, NCCN National Comprehensive Cancer Network, SmPC summary of product characteristics, USPI United States Prescribing Information The first stage of the process involves collating different sources of information for each IMP. The sources comprise documents that summarise the existing safety-related knowledge for the IMP including the existing TMGs, internal IMP-specific documents such as Clinical Study Protocols (CSPs), Investigator’s Brochure (IB), and Core Data Sheet (CDS). In addition to other drug labels of the same class, such as the EU Summary of Product Characteristics (SmPC), United States Prescribing Information (USPI) and published guidelines such as the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) guideline for grading and National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines for clinical practice. Literature reviews are also conducted to gain a holistic understanding of the safety of individual IMPs and their class. The collation of sources is carried out by using search terms related to the IMP as well as its class products. The prioritisation of sources is based upon the most up-to-date version of a document at the time of conducting the TMG standardisation. In scenarios where there could be conflicting information with external literature, labels and clinical guidance documents may take priority subject to project team approval. TMGs are subject to internal governance and health authority review. TMG updates are version controlled and stored securely for clear documentation. Following on from collection of the relevant data sources, the information is carefully reviewed to obtain a detailed understanding of the IMP, its current safety profile, and other risks associated with the class. The TMGs for each IMP within a product class are then compared with one another, looking at each toxicity on an individual and grade-by-grade basis, highlighting similarities and differences between them. Upon completion of the comparison, each of the identified differences should be investigated to understand any medical and scientific rationale for the variation. If there is such a rationale, such as an increased risk of that toxicity only for one of the IMPs in the class—and therefore the requirement for more stringent management guidelines—this text is unsuitable for standardisation but should be stored for future reference for products with similar toxicity management needs. Otherwise, a standardised version of the guideline can be implemented. An additional consideration is ensuring that the implementation of any management of toxicities is standardised in a manner that is applicable to all regions where the drug is being investigated. For instance, a non–product-specific usage of drugs should be advised (i.e., ‘appropriate anti-emetic’) rather than referencing a specific product (unless there is specific rationale such as drug–drug reactions). This ensures that regions where a cited drug is not available can follow the TMG in the same way as any other. When creating standardised text for a toxicity, it is advised that a conservative approach is used to ensure that the safety and wellbeing of patients is the priority of changes to the guidance. Ultimately, alongside the standardised guidelines, the specific patient population, indication, and patient burden must also be considered when treating the patient in the trial. Additional factors such as age, comorbidities, and lifestyle should also be considered to better understand which patient populations are more at risk of certain toxicities, and this is expanded upon in the discussion. TMG Standardisation Examples Individual toxicities were evaluated and standardised as described In the Methods section. Across the Topo1i ADC products, differences were considered in the body of the TMG text, as well as in the categorisation of the grading/severity groups. This made direct comparison a challenge because the guidelines are categorised in various ways. It is important to first review these differences and determine the reasons for these variations, considering the patient population, indication, and the mechanism of action of the IMP, and assessing the impact of these on guideline categories. Secondly, review the text in each of these categories to identify similarities and differences within the guidelines themselves. It is important to identify the key messaging within this text that will be carried forward into the standardised set. It should be highlighted that TMG standardisation is not limited to the toxicities outlined below. TMGs should be reviewed for all key toxicities included in the respective guideline document, which are dependent on the payload/target or class of drugs being reviewed. Other key toxicities common to the Topo1i ADC class include gastrointestinal, ocular, and hypersensitivity reactions. The following are illustrative examples, not explicit recommendations, to represent different challenges in standardisation and proposed approaches to overcome these. Interstitial Lung Disease Drug-induced interstitial lung disease (ILD) encompasses a heterogeneous group of disorders unified by similar clinical, radiographic, physiologic, or pathologic manifestations occurring in the pulmonary system including lungs, bronchi, pulmonary vessels, and pleura [ 5 ]. ILD results in inflammation or fibrosis within the interstitial space, primarily impairing gas exchange, which results in breathlessness and a diminished quality of life [ 6 ]. The outcomes vary considerably for different ILDs. In some conditions, reversibility or stabilisation can occur following drug discontinuation or treatment with corticosteroids. Other clinical presentations of ILD, such as progressive pulmonary fibrosis or diffuse alveolar damage, are associated with a poor prognosis and can lead to lasting fibrosis, respiratory failure, and even death [ 5 , 7 ]. Given these risks, a conservative approach was applied to standardising TMGs for this toxicity. One notable difference in ILD TMGs across the Topo1i class of ADCs was the dose modification guidelines for events of CTCAE grade 1 severity. For instance, as highlighted in Table 1 , the TMG for Product A suggests that the intervention can be resumed at the same dose if the event resolves within 28 days, and at a lower dose if it resolves after 28 days. Conversely, for Product B, guidance is broader, without a well-defined criterion that qualifies a patient for IMP continuation. Table 1 CTCAE grade 1 interstitial lung disease dose modification standardisation Interstitial lung disease Product A dose modifications Product B dose modifications Standardised dose modifications If ILD/pneumonitis resolves before 28 days from event onset date, product A may be resumed at the same dose. If after 28 days, resume at lower dose Consider continuing study intervention at the same dose level with close monitoring Study intervention can continue after careful evaluation of the benefit–risk assessment on a case-by-case basis and after discussion with the Sponsor The administration of study intervention must be interrupted Study intervention administration can be restarted only if the event is fully resolved to Grade 0 • If resolved in ≤1 cycle*/** from day of onset, then maintain dose • If resolved in 1 cycle*/** from day of onset, then reduce dose 1 level • However, if the event Grade 1 ILD/pneumonitis has not resolved within X days** from the last infusion, consider discontinuing study intervention upon agreement with study physician Grade 0 refers to full resolution of ILD/pneumonitis, including the disappearance of radiological findings associated with active ILD/pneumonitis. Residual scarring or fibrosis following recovery of ILD/pneumonitis is not considered to be active disease *refer to study protocol for specific weeks/days per cycle **X days will be specified in protocol based on length of protocol-defined cycle(s) CTCAE Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, ILD interstitial lung disease In the standardised form of these TMGs, dose interruptions are advised if the event does not resolve within a specified cross-product transferable time frame, determined by a number of factors including prior experience of the event with the same or a similar class of interventions, dosing cycle length, and radiographic assessment intervals/scheduling. The resolution of the event is defined by grade 0 with a clear diagnostic criterion [ 8 ]. This approach provides treating physicians with logical and clear instructions regarding the suitability of reintroducing the study intervention. For events like ILD, where the prognosis can deteriorate rapidly if not managed promptly, well-defined guidelines are essential to ensure consistent and best practice of care across all patients and clinical study sites. As outlined in Table 2 , one set of TMGs emphasised ruling out alternative aetiologies and, for specific treatments, directed investigators to follow institutional guidelines. While excluding alternative aetiologies is critical from a causality perspective, it is also imperative in ensuring the appropriate treatment is selected. Providing supplementary treatment guidance beyond local protocols can help ensure clarity and consistency in managing potential ILD cases. Thus, to support standardisation, the existing TMGs were enhanced with additional treatment recommendations. For clarity, the TMG for each grade within a toxicity contains dose modification guidance (Table 1 ) alongside treatment recommendations (Table 2 ). Table 2 Example standardised TMG for treatment of interstitial lung disease alongside an example product TMG for comparison Grade of the event (CTCAE) Any Grade Grade 1 Grade 2 Grade 3 or 4 Example Product TMG Consider the following to exclude alternative aetiologies: - Chest CT (preferably high-resolution CT) and pulmonologist consultation as clinically indicated - Chest X-ray - Pulmonary function tests (spirometry, DLCO) - Physical examination - Monitor oxygen saturation via pulse oximetry - Laboratory work-up as indicated • Repeat spirometry and DLCO after 21 days from detection • Consider additional imaging (eg, HRCT scan) if feasible if patients remain asymptomatic, then the event should be considered as Grade 1, even if treatment with corticosteroids is given • Promptly start and treat with systemic steroids per institutional guidelines • Promptly initiate high-dose corticosteroid treatment per institutional guidelines Standardised TMG • Monitor participants for signs and symptoms of pneumonitis or ILD (new onset or worsening shortness of breath or cough) • Evaluate participants with imaging and pulmonary function tests, including other diagnostic procedures as described in the following bullet points • Suspected pneumonitis should be confirmed with radiographic imaging and other infectious and disease-related aetiologies excluded, and managed as described in this table (see ILD Grade 1 to 4) • Initial work-up may include clinical evaluation, monitoring of oxygenation via pulse oximetry (resting and exertion), laboratory work-up incl. KL-6, SP-D, beta-D-glucan, and high-resolution CT scan • Consider pulmonary and infectious diseases consults • Monitor and closely follow-up for onset of clinical symptoms and pulse oximetry • Consider follow-up imaging in 1–2 weeks (or as clinically indicated) • Consider starting systemic steroids (e.g., at least 0.5 mg/kg/day prednisone or equivalent) until improvement, followed by gradual taper over at least 4 weeks • If new or worsening symptoms and diagnostic observations, then follow Grade 2 guidelines • Promptly start and treat with systemic steroids (e.g., at least 1 mg/kg/day prednisone or equivalent) for at least 14 days or until complete resolution of clinical and chest CT findings, followed by gradual taper over at least 4 weeks • Monitor symptoms closely • Re-image as clinically indicated • If worsening or no improvement in clinical or diagnostic observations in 5 days, consider increasing dose of steroids (e.g., 2 mg/kg/day prednisone or equivalent) and switching treatment administration to IV (e.g., methylprednisolone) • Re-consider additional work-up for alternative aetiologies as described above • Escalate care as clinically indicated • Hospitalisation required • Promptly initiate empiric high-dose methylprednisolone IV treatment (e.g., 500–1000 mg/day for 3 days), followed by at least 1.0 mg/kg/day of prednisone (or equivalent) for at least 14 days or until complete resolution of clinical symptoms and chest CT findings, followed by gradual taper over at least 4 weeks • Re-image as clinically indicated • If still no improvement within 3–5 days, re-consider additional work-up for alternative aetiologies as described above • Consider other immunosuppressants and/or treat per local practice CT computed tomography, CTCAE Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, DLCO diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide, HRCT high resolution computed tomography, ILD interstitial lung disease, IV intravenous, TMG toxicity management guideline Neutrophil Count Decreased Neutrophil count decrease (NCD) is an important laboratory value toxicity that is often related to antineoplastic-induced bone marrow suppression effects. Neutropenia can be an important risk for patients as they can become vulnerable to infection and, if not effectively managed, can develop life-threatening and possibly fatal conditions such as febrile neutropenia and sepsis [ 9 ]. Having a standard approach across the Topo1i ADC class will add clarity to the treatment management and dose modification of this important toxicity. Due to the complexity and grading of this risk, the NCD grade grouping was different across the ADC products. Some Topo1i ADC products referenced fever and/or systemic infection in addition to CTCAE grading, and other products within the class did not. For example, product A and B referenced “Febrile neutropenia or Grade 4 associated with fever or systemic infection” while product C only referenced “Febrile neutropenia or Grade 4”. In the Severity Grade column of Fig. 2 a, it is hard to decipher the correct scenario of a certain adverse event. Differences between grouping and TMG text were reviewed together to identify key messages across the grade groups and how this categorisation could be improved for added clarity. Following this analysis, the most appropriate standard categorisation/grading for NCD was to add an additional row to split the categories for further clarity, as shown in Fig. 2 b. The separation of febrile neutropenia was introduced with the aim of simplifying the categorisation to ensure they are unambiguous to the investigators in the hope that this would improve adherence to the TMGs and reduce potential confusion. Clinically, Grade 4 (absolute neutrophil count [ANC] test results of 500/mm 3 ; 0.5 × 10e9 / L) associated with fever or systemic infection differs from febrile neutropenia, which is defined as “a disorder characterised by ANC 1000/mm 3 and a single temperature of 38.3 degrees C (101 degrees F) or a sustained temperature of ≥38 degrees C (100.4 degrees F) for more than one hour” [ 10 ]. Standard text was placed into the appropriate category, making sure all key TMG messaging and scenarios were carried forward from the various products. Fig. 2 Simplifying grade categorisation for neutrophil count decrease (NCD) across Topo1i ADCs. ( a ) Rationale and problem: Across products, the NCD ‘Severity Grade’ mixed CTCAE grades with qualifiers (fever/systemic infection), making categories hard to interpret. ( b ) Standardised solution: Categories were redefined to three separate key clinical scenarios. Standardised dose modification and management text is mapped to these rows, preserving essential TMG intent while improving clarity and global applicability. ADCs antibody–drug conjugates, CTCAE Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, TMG toxicity management guideline Elevated Liver Enzymes Elevated liver tests include enzymes that reflect hepatocellular or cholestatic (biliary) injury such as serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT), and those that are more reflective of hepatic function and impairment, such as total bilirubin (TBIL) and international normalised ratio (INR) levels. Elevations in baseline ALT and/or bilirubin are common in oncology patients and can be more frequent in those with hepatic metastases than those without [ 11 ]. Elevated liver tests are an important toxicity to consider as, if it is not appropriately managed in patients, it can lead to severe and serious conditions such as drug-induced liver injury (DILI) or acute liver failure [ 12 ]. The severity of this toxicity can lead to increased dose interruptions or discontinuations in clinical trials and in some cases can be fatal, which is why having conservative and clear TMGs is vital to protect patients. A difference in the Topo1i ADC TMGs for elevated liver enzymes was the text used for ‘any grade’; one product recommended considering a hepatology consult for Grade 3 or above events whereas two products did not include details beyond local clinical guidance. As mentioned, the priority was maintaining a clear and conservative approach. Thus, standardising the recommendation for consideration of a hepatology consult ensures that thorough investigations are conducted with appropriate expertise. Another instance of this was in the Grade 4 guidelines where some products strictly stated, “permanently discontinue study intervention” while others stated, “permanently discontinue if other aetiologies can be excluded”. So similarly, a conservative approach to “permanently discontinue study intervention” was kept for consistency. Table 3 shows an example of two products with their original grading and the standardised grade categorisation to be implemented for all elevated liver enzymes TMGs, demonstrating a more concise and easy-to-follow criteria for each grade. There were several differences identified between the categories for grading, often with complex subcategories. For example, it was also noted that the description for categorising Grade 3 lacked a uniform definition across the products. With that in mind, and with knowledge of the CTCAE, the authors simplified the Grade 3 categorisation, providing two simple subcategories within the dose modification guidelines for patients with and without metastases. A similar approach was adopted for all the grades. Table 3 Examples of the original grading criteria (CTCAE v5) for two products against the proposed standardised version for liver tests to include AST, ALT, ALP Original categories for 3 products Original categories for Product X Standardised categories Any grade Any grade Any grade Grade 1–2 Grade 2 ( 3.0–5.0 × ULN if baseline was normal; 3.0–5.0 × baseline if baseline was abnormal) Grade 1–2 Grade 3 ( 5.0 to 20.0 × ULN if baseline was normal; 5.0 to 20.0 × baseline if baseline was abnormal) In participants without liver metastases and baseline level was ≤3 × ULN Grade 3 ( 8.0 to 20.0 × ULN if baseline was normal; 8.0 to 20.0 × baseline if baseline was abnormal) In participants with liver metastases, if the baseline level was ≤3 × ULN) Grade 3 ( 5.0–20.0 × ULN if baseline was normal; 5.0–20.0 × baseline if baseline was abnormal) In participants without liver metastases and participants with liver metastases and baseline level ≤3 × ULN Grade 3 ( 8.0–20.0 × ULN if baseline was normal; 8.0–20.0 × baseline if baseline was abnormal) In participants with liver metastases, if the baseline level was 3 × ULN Grade 3 - Participants without liver metastases - Participants with liver metastases Grade 4 Grade 4 ( 20.0 × ULN if baseline was normal; 20.0 × baseline if baseline was abnormal) Grade 4 Hy’s law criteria* (AST or ALT 3 × ULN accompanied by Grade ≥2 blood bilirubin increased) Hy’s law criteria (AST or ALT 3 × ULN accompanied by Grade ≥2 blood bilirubin increased) Hy’s law criteria (AST or ALT 3 × ULN accompanied by Grade ≥2 blood bilirubin increased) * US Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Drug-Induced Liver Injury: Premarketing Clinical Evaluation. 2009[ 13 ] ALP alkaline phosphatase, ALT alanine aminotransferase, AST aspartate aminotransferase, CTCAE Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events , ULN upper limit of normal Discussion The considerations and approaches to standardised toxicity management that have been outlined are intentionally developed to result in a semi-standardised outcome. Standardisation should be prioritised where evidence supports class-wide guidance, and structured flexibility can be maintained for justified, drug- or target-specific deviations. This approach ensures safety-first, conservative principles whilst keeping toxicity management fit for purpose in a rapidly evolving development landscape. The aforementioned framework was primarily designed with AZ trials as a template, with the potential to tailor to external applicability. Similarly, this article and examples described are focussed on the Topo1i ADC therapeutic class, however extension to other drug classes and modalities is possible. For instance, this framework is being applied to the next generation of AZ ADCs in early development with different payload and antibody targets. Whilst standardised TMGs are important for quality clinical trial design and consistent AE-related responsive care for all participants, there are several factors, such as age, comorbidities, and lifestyle, that should also be considered by the investigator when putting the guidance into practice. Understanding which patient populations are more at risk to certain toxicities, and considering a holistic overview of the individual patient, is crucial for identifying where application of these tailored treatments is necessary. Nonetheless, the standardised guidelines should form the basis of any approach and can be built upon according to these added risks. Due to these factors being highly specific, general recommendations have been avoided in this article in favour of context-specific patient management. Although not mandatory, the additional aspects discussed in the following sections can be incorporated to increase robustness and applicability of resulting guidelines. While not an exhaustive list, examples of considerations are laid out ahead. Therapy Area It is also important to consider the scope of TMG standardisation beyond the oncology therapy area and how this may differ across indications. Outside of oncology, drugs are often developed to treat conditions that are chronic in nature. Therefore, the safety profile should enable long-term symptom control whilst maintaining an adequate quality of life. This means that both oncology and non-oncology drugs require a tailored consideration of toxicity and benefit–risk impact. For products being investigated in oncology, often more severe toxicities are tolerated due to the disease being highly associated with morbidity and mortality. By contrast, non-oncology drugs are often treating chronic conditions such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder (COPD) that prioritise long-term management of the condition and maximising quality of life, which results in greater emphasis on minimising chronic toxicities to ensure long-term tolerability. Phase I non-oncology studies are often conducted in healthy volunteers, highlighting a large contrast in benefit–risk considerations between therapy areas for early-development studies. For example, interruption or discontinuation criteria for a certain toxicity may be more stringent for a COPD patient. More intensive monitoring for hepatotoxicity may be required if the study drug has a known potential of DILI liability. Key risks of drugs such as liver toxicity and more specifically DILI may be approached differently across therapy areas [ 14 ]. Eligibility criteria in a lung cancer trial may allow a wider eligibility window for liver function screening due to liver metastases in the patient population. However, as a result, a study in this indication may require more intensive liver function testing throughout the study due to the toxic nature of oncology drugs when compared with a COPD trial. Also, grading the severity of these toxicities differs dependent on the therapy area, modality, or indication. Oncology widely utilises the quantitative CTCAE grading system, whereas other therapy areas such as vaccines use a more qualitative mild-moderate-severe scale [ 15 ]. Also, for next-generation therapies such as CAR-T therapy, new grading systems are being defined for toxicities emerging with these therapies (e.g. ASTCT Consensus grading for cytokine release syndrome [CRS] and Immune Cell Associated Neurotoxicity Syndrome [ICANS]) [ 16 ]. Indication The treatment population, and importantly, the stage of the indicated disease, may influence how patients tolerate treatment and, in turn, how these toxicities are managed. In the first instance, patients with advanced-stage cancer may have compromised organ function due to tumour burden, prior lines of anti-cancer treatment, or metastasis, reducing their ability to tolerate additional toxicities. For those with advanced stage cancer, maintaining quality of life becomes a priority over aggressive treatment, meaning more conservative management of toxicities may be necessary to avoid further deterioration. Conversely, patients with early-stage cancer or receiving first-line therapy, especially those on treatment with a curative intent, might have better organ reserve and overall health, and therefore the ability to tolerate more severe adverse effects without the need for discontinuation of the IMP. Additionally, more aggressive management of toxicities may be justified in order to achieve efficacy of the treatment. That said, patients with cancer of any stage may endure symptoms that significantly impact their daily lives. Therefore, above all else, it is crucial to prioritise the management of a treatment plan that enhances the patients' quality of life and upholds their best interests throughout the trial. The standardised TMG provides a clear foundation of toxicity management according to best clinical practice upon which investigators build a tailored approach depending on the individual patient and indication. Another aspect to consider is the risk of the same toxicity in different indications. For example, a patient with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) experiencing drug-induced interstitial lung disease (ILD) as an adverse effect, may have severely impacted respiratory function as a baseline, necessitating careful monitoring and management, perhaps even more so than as laid out in the standardised TMG, with a lower threshold for discontinuation. Conversely, a patient with melanoma and ILD, for example, typically won’t have the same baseline respiratory compromise as NSCLC patients, potentially resulting in a less severe impact on quality of life. The treatment approach to this toxicity would still be similar to NSCLC, but the focus might be more on monitoring and treating symptoms rather than discontinuation of the IMP. Age It is well known that ageing is a risk factor for disease; common diseases of old age include cardiovascular diseases, neurodegenerative diseases and cancer [ 17 ]. In consideration of the background of the patient—whether they have other comorbidities, as is likely with increasing age—more stringent toxicity management may need to be applied. On the other hand, the patient’s medical condition may make them unable to tolerate harsh treatment regimens for the adverse events, such as steroids. Similarly, for paediatric studies, where additional ethical implications are imposed, and given the vulnerable nature of the population, investigators may consider a more conservative discontinuation criterion. Considering the age demographic of the study population and how this may impact the benefit/risk is important when standardising dose modification guidelines and any treatment recommendations by keeping the patient in the forefront of decisions. Additionally, each patient should be assessed holistically throughout implementation of toxicity management regimens with consideration for the impact on development, organ function, and reproduction as well as their ability to tolerate further interventions. The sponsor can reflect this through the TMG document to provide additional guidance to investigators. Sex Males and females can experience cancer incidence differently due to factors such as gene polymorphism, changes in enzymes involved in drug metabolism, hormones and other genetic factors. The sex of the patient is a factor that should be taken into consideration as studies have shown that women may have a lower capacity to clear certain drugs, such as fluorouracil, compared with men [ 18 ]. However, no differences in drug clearance were found between men and women for other drugs, like imatinib, indicating that the impact of sex on drug metabolism can vary widely depending on the specific medication [ 18 ]. It has also been shown that women can experience ADRs more frequently [ 19 ], with a study reporting that 11 drugs showed greater than 40% difference in PK measures between males and females, yet no dosing recommendations to consider sex were issued, based on the assumption that these differences were not clinically relevant [ 20 ]. Therefore, the sex demographic of the study population is an important element to reflect on when creating standardised toxicity management guidelines to ensure a conservative approach is maintained that keeps all patients protected. In oncology studies, contraception is usually mandated to prevent pregnancy as embryo-foetal toxicity is not typically a characterised risk. It is safer for patients to avoid pregnancy when taking oncology drugs due to the potential for them to be highly toxic and lead to serious and severe adverse events. However, in non-oncology studies, contraception is not typically mandated but pregnancy and fertility are factors that should be considered when creating TMGs to ensure that best efforts are made for pregnancy prevention and protection against loss of fertility. General Limitations of the Methodology The standardised TMGs must be reviewed and updated regularly as medical knowledge progresses and advances. Institutional guidelines (from organisations such as American Society of Clinical Oncology [ASCO] and European Society for Medical Oncology [ESMO]), industry knowledge, and healthcare technologies are constantly evolving; therefore, there is a need for clear guidance where there is a difference in approach to, for example, the class or duration of treatment expected depending on posology/dosing regimen. A prevalent example of this are recent updates in guidelines surrounding prophylaxis like anti-emetics and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) to manage nausea and neutropenia class effects, respectively [ 10 , 21 ]. Consulting and incorporating perspectives from clinicians, regulatory agencies, and patient advocacy groups is worth considering in the development of these guidelines as it can further enhance their applicability and acceptance. To approach this, adoption of standardised guidelines should accompany a periodic review cycle (e.g. annual), during which best practice guidelines are routinely consulted to confirm they are aligned with current best clinical practice. Ad hoc changes are advised if a finding is profound enough to justify a change to the standard template outside of the annual review period (e.g. mandating prophylactic use of G-CSF (granulocyte-colony stimulating factor) when the incidence of higher grade neutropenia is markedly greater than expected). Where considered appropriate, an expert knowledge group or individual for the relevant organ should be consulted as well as cross-functional consultation with the relevant stakeholders. It may also be worth considering incorporating perspectives from clinicians, regulatory agencies, and patient advocacy groups in the development of these guidelines to further enhance their applicability and acceptance. Alignment and endorsement across these functions, informed by experts, will ensure successful implementation and increased impact of the standardised TMGs across clinical trials. Looking forward, as medical technology advances, there may be potential for the implementation of a periodic update process to utilise artificial intelligence (AI) to monitor the regulatory landscape for updates to best clinical practice guidelines [ 22 ]. For instance, natural language processing could be utilised to extract, interpret, and summarise complex medical documents to increase efficiency in key data extraction, summarisation, and communication of updates. and, even better, real-time alerts to patient safety teams could accompany this. Furthermore, AI-driven systems could streamline the integration of diverse data sources, such as clinical trial results and expert consensus, to provide a cohesive view of evolving best practices. By leveraging predictive analytics, AI can forecast potential changes in clinical guidelines, allowing teams to proactively adapt their guidelines. Additionally, personalised update recommendations tailored to specific specialties and practice environments could enhance the relevance and applicability of the information in the guidelines if AI was used as a tool alongside them. Overall, the strategic use of AI in this context promises to significantly enhance the timeliness and accuracy of implementing standardised TMG updates, ultimately improving patient outcomes. Conclusions The field of oncology treatment is rapidly advancing with increasing complexity, primarily driven by the development and integration of innovative therapies such as ADCs. These therapies represent a significant focus within the oncology space at AstraZeneca due to their targeted approach, which promises improved efficacy in cancer treatment. However, as these treatments become more prevalent, it is crucial to address the associated toxicities that cancer patients may experience in their clinical trials and implement effective management of these toxicities to ensure that patients receive the best possible care while minimising adverse effects in clinical trials. Currently, there are a range of reasons for irregularity in TMGs across various ADC products both within and across classes or indications. These irregularities may stem from the diverse prior experiences of different authors. For instance, some may draw on work with drugs from the same or different classes, or on practices from different companies. This inconsistency may lead to disparities in the way toxicities are managed across clinical trial sites thus highlighting a need for standardised TMGs that can be universally applied across different ADCs and other modalities. Such standardisation would streamline the process for Patient Safety teams, who construct TMGs to accompany clinical study protocols, but also enhance the overall efficiency and effectiveness of patient management within clinical trials. This will increase consistency in toxicity management throughout clinical trials to enhance safety and ensure our patients are protected. The authors have proposed a comprehensive approach to TMG standardisation, considering an array of reference documents and data sources, as well as the different contextual factors such as age, sex and disease indication. This approach is designed to be conservative and non-mandated, providing a flexible structure that allows investigators the freedom to adapt guidelines to individual patient needs. The standardised TMGs simply provide a starting point or basis upon which the individual TMGs for a specific product can be built. By accommodating necessary adjustments, this framework ensures that patient treatment is consistent with the best practices but can be personalised where deemed necessary. Although this methodology has been developed for oncology, it is versatile, and the principles can be extended to any drug class or modality. The ability to adapt this framework to various therapeutic areas underscores its potential for broad application and impact. By providing a solid foundation for the rapid development of medical practices, this methodology ensures that updates to best clinical practice guidelines can be swiftly implemented, keeping pace with the dynamic nature of the ADC and general medical field. In essence, the proposed standardisation approach addresses current challenges in the oncology landscape and paves the way for continuous improvement in patient safety. By aligning clinical practices with evolving scientific insights, this framework supports the ongoing advancement of oncology treatments, ultimately contributing to better health outcomes for clinical trial patients. Supplementary Information Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material. Supplementary file1 (PDF 181 KB)