Takeaways Question: Do the program sizes of Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education–accredited plastic surgery residency programs affect trainee case volumes? Findings: Between 2014 and 2023, average case volumes of plastic surgery graduates remained stable over time in large and small residency programs. Residents in large programs performed more breast cases, while no evidence of a difference was seen in aesthetic, craniofacial/head and neck, hand/nerve, and other domains. Meaning : Plastic surgery residents receive robust surgical training regardless of residency program size. Understanding how program size influences trainee case volumes can help programs identify training imbalances and guide efforts to ensure equitable, comprehensive surgical education. INTRODUCTION The size of a residency program, defined by the number of residents it is approved to train annually, is regulated by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) through a formal complement process. 1 – 3 Residency programs that seek to increase their resident complement must demonstrate sufficient clinical volume, educational infrastructure, and faculty support to ensure that each resident receives a robust and comprehensive surgical education. 2 , 3 Conversely, the ACGME may mandate a reduction in a program’s resident complement if site visits, case logs, or other educational aspects suggest that a program is unable to maintain adequate operative exposure or educational quality. 1 Thus, the overall complement of a residency program is closely tied to the surgical and educational opportunities that programs have available. In surgical specialties such as plastic surgery, operative case volume is a critical metric of training opportunity and often acts as a surrogate for resident competency, though not equivalent. 4 – 7 Although all training programs must meet minimum case requirements set forth by the ACGME, significant variability exists in the number and diversity of cases that residents actually complete. Program size has been proposed as a possible correlate of this variability. Intuitively, one may presume that programs with a larger complement offer a wider range and complexity of surgical services, have higher patient volumes, and possess a greater diversity of faculty experience—potentially enhancing operative exposure. In subspecialties such as ophthalmology, 8 , 9 larger program size has been correlated with increased resident case log volume in key categories, though no such difference was found in neurosurgery. 10 Further, in both surgical and nonsurgical fields, program size has been associated with other factors, including performance on standardized board examinations, 11 – 13 operative autonomy, 14 preparedness for practice, 15 and resident comfort with specific procedures. 16 On the other hand, smaller programs may benefit from smaller faculty-to-resident ratios and fewer residents “competing” for cases, possibly increasing per-resident surgical experience. Despite these theoretical possibilities, the impact of program size on operative case volume remains unknown in plastic surgery, as no studies exist analyzing this relationship. Thus, the aim of this study is to evaluate the effect of program size on plastic surgery resident operative case volumes using national ACGME case log data across a 9-year period. METHODS A retrospective cohort study was performed by obtaining case logs from the ACGME. The ACGME is an independent nonprofit organization that sets and monitors professional educational standards for physicians in training and oversees the accreditation of residency and fellowship programs in the United States. 17 Residents and fellows are required to log every operative experience throughout their training via the ACGME Case Log System. 18 , 19 As such, the ACGME maintains operative records, including case category and case year, as well as demographics for all trainees. The ACGME has a plenary institutional review board exemption (EX00705) for database studies from the American Institute for Research; thus, this study was exempt from institutional review board approval. The ACGME provided access to the de-identified aggregated case logs of all graduating plastic surgery residents in ACGME-accredited plastic surgery training programs in the United States across a 9-year period from 2014 to 2023. This dataset included aggregated case volume for program information (program location, program size, independent versus integrated track, overall number of programs, graduate academic year [AY]), case log information (case category), and trainee demographic information (self-identified sex, race/ethnicity). All plastic surgery graduates between 2014 and 2023 from an ACGME-accredited plastic surgery residency program were included. No additional exclusion criteria were applied. The primary variable of interest included program size, which was defined by the number of residents in the program. Program size was stratified as either 3 or more residents or fewer than 3 residents per graduating class, as defined by the ACGME. Case categories were further grouped into the following defined subspecialty domains: breast, craniofacial/head and neck, hand/nerve, aesthetic, and other (Table 1 ). Subgroup analyses were conducted to determine whether there were significant differences in case volume within program type and subspecialty domain based on program size. Differences in program size over time for large and small programs were also analyzed. Table 1. Categorization of Individual Case Types Into Larger Subspecialty Domains Breast Hand/Nerve Craniofacial/Head and Neck Aesthetic Other Absent breast Nerve injury Head and neck aesthetic deformity Laser Lower extremity wounds and deformities Breast ptosis Nerve compression Head and neck congenital defects Suction-assisted lipoplasty Microvascular/free tissue transfer Breast macromastia Dupuytren contracture Head and neck neoplasms Use of injectables Wounds or deformities of trunk Breast micromastia Fracture or dislocation Head and neck trauma Trunk/extremity aesthetic deformities Integument burns Breast and oncological surgery Hand and upper extremity wound requiring reconstruction Alimentary tract/abdominal surgery Nerve compression Trauma/critical care/anesthesia Tendon (extensor or flexor) Tissue expansion Arterial insufficiency or amputation of digit, hand, or upper extremity Other deformity or disease process Statistical Analyses ACGME data were provided as aggregations. Total case volume across subspecialty domains was calculated by pooling across strata. To compare mean case volumes between large and small programs (defined as ≥3 and 3 residents, respectively), we fit weighted least squares regression models with weights equal to the number of hospitals contributing to each estimate, thereby more robustly accounting for heterogeneity in variances between large and small programs when homogeneity assumptions were unverifiable. Point estimates and 95% confidence intervals for each program size and the P value for their comparison were directly obtained from the fitted models. Similarly, to compare case logs over time within subgroups, an F test comparing nested weighted least squares–fitted models (full versus reduced) was computed. Statistical analyses were performed using R version 4.4.1 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). A P value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. RESULTS A total of 1902 plastic surgery graduates (859 independent and 1043 integrated residents) during 9 AYs from 2014 to 2023 were included. In the AY 2022/2023, there were a total of 114 plastic surgery training programs in the United States. There were 30 large programs (2 independent, 28 integrated) and 84 small programs (37 independent, 47 integrated). From AY 2014/2015 to AY 2022/2023, the number of large and small independent programs decreased, whereas the total number of large and small integrated programs increased (Table 2 ). Table 2. Distribution of Residency Programs per AY Stratified by Program Size and Program Track No. Large Programs, n (%) No. Small Programs, n (%) Total Number of Programs AY Independent Integrated Independent Integrated Independent Integrated 2014–2015 13 (20) 10 (36) 52 (80) 18 (64) 65 28 2015–2016 14 (22) 11 (32) 51 (78) 23 (68) 65 34 2016–2017 15 (23) 12 (32) 49 (77) 26 (68) 65 38 2017–2018 11 (20) 13 (27) 44 (80) 35 (73) 55 48 2018–2019 6 (13) 14 (24) 41 (87) 44 (76) 47 58 2019–2020 4 (9) 21 (32) 39 (91) 44 (68) 43 65 2020–2021 4 (9) 21 (30) 40 (91) 49 (70) 44 70 2021–2022 2 (5) 25 (35) 41 (95) 47 (65) 43 72 2022–2023 2 (5) 28 (37) 37 (95) 47 (63) 39 75 Overall, plastic surgery residents in large programs performed similar numbers of cases as residents in small programs (2387 versus 2241, respectively; P = 0.154). When stratified by program type, there were no detectable differences in the average number of cases performed between large and small programs in both the independent ( P = 0.278) and integrated ( P = 0.938) formats (Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1. Average number of case logs stratified by program size and program track. A subgroup analysis of subspecialty domains demonstrated significant differences in the average number of cases logged based on program size for the breast category. Residents in large programs performed significantly more breast cases than residents in small programs (570 versus 491, respectively; P = 0.001). There were no statistically significant detectable differences in the number of aesthetic ( P = 0.633), craniofacial/head and neck ( P = 0.839), hand/nerve ( P = 0.549), or other ( P = 0.123) cases between large and small programs (Table 3 ). Table 3. Average Number of Cases Stratified by Program Size and Subspecialty Domain Subspecialty Program Size Mean 95% CI P * Aesthetic 3 residents 249 238.4–259.9 0.633 ≥3 residents 253 239.7–266.8 Breast 3 residents 491 463.2–519.1 0.001 ≥3 residents 570 535.1–605.7 Craniofacial/head and neck 3 residents 564 535.9–591.5 0.839 ≥3 residents 568 533.1–603.3 Hand/nerve 3 residents 362 336.6–388.4 0.549 ≥3 residents 350 317.4–382.8 Other 3 residents 575 518.6–631.0 0.123 ≥3 residents 645 574.4–718.3 * A P value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. CI, confidence interval. The average number of cases logged remained stable for both program types across the 9-year period (Fig. 2 ). From AY 2014/2015 to AY 2022/2023, the average case volume among small programs increased by a total of 331 cases (from 2023 to 2354, P = 0.989), whereas large programs sustained a total increase of 372 cases (2194 to 2566, P = 0.880) (Fig. 2 ), though these increases were not statistically significant. Fig. 2. Average number of case logs stratified by program size across 9 years (AY 2014/2015 to AY 2022/2023). CI, confidence interval. DISCUSSION This is the first study to examine the relationship between plastic surgery residency program size and ACGME case log volumes. Across the 9-year period, we observed a shift in the structure of plastic surgery training pathways, characterized by a decline in the number of independent programs and a concurrent increase in integrated programs, irrespective of program size (Fig. 3 ). Our analysis highlighted a stable trend in the average number of cases logged across both large and small programs. When stratified by program track, independent and integrated residents logged comparable case volumes regardless of program size. Subspecialty analysis revealed that large programs had significantly higher volumes of breast cases. No detectable differences in case volumes were identified between large and small programs within the aesthetic, craniofacial/head and neck, hand/nerve, and other domains. Fig. 3. Complementary trends of US plastic surgery training programs over time. The number of independent programs continues to decline, whereas the number of integrated programs steadily increases, highlighting the evolving structure of plastic surgery training in the United States. This finding reinforces the larger shift seen in plastic surgery training with integrated models now serving as the predominant pathway. Historically, the independent track, generally entered after completing general surgery training, was the traditional route into plastic surgery. 20 However, the integrated model, which allows for earlier exposure to plastic surgery through a 6-year direct pathway after medical school, has gained favor among programs and applicants. 21 Despite these evolving trends in training pathways, the analysis presented in this study suggests that case exposure is not statistically different when considering program track. Independent and integrated residents performed comparable numbers of cases, regardless of whether they trained at small or large programs. Moreover, the finding that the average number of cases in both large and small programs remained stable over the past decade reinforces a broader trend in surgical training: case volumes have not declined 22 – 25 despite evolving program structures and prior concerns about limitations imposed by ACGME work hour reforms. 23 , 24 , 26 An analysis of subspecialty domains revealed that programs with 3 or more graduating residents per year performed significantly more breast cases compared with smaller programs. The former finding may be driven by US trends in breast cancer prevalence and breast reconstruction. Breast cancer is the most common cancer among women after skin cancer, 27 affecting approximately 1 in 8 women over their lifetime. 28 Breast reconstruction following oncological breast surgery has become increasingly more prevalent since the passage of the Women’s Health and Cancer Rights Act of 1998, which mandated health insurance coverage of all stages of breast reconstruction after mastectomy, 29 , 30 and is associated with improved psychosocial well-being, sexuality, and quality of life. 31 – 33 Prior studies have shown that the availability and likelihood of undergoing breast reconstruction is significantly influenced by institutional characteristics and provider density. 34 , 35 Bauder et al 34 reported that breast reconstruction rates are higher in regions with a greater density of plastic surgeons, and a recent study found that approximately 43% of breast and plastic surgeons practiced in an urban setting. 36 Further, Retrouvey et al 35 found that patients were more likely to receive reconstruction when treated at academic or teaching hospitals, high-volume centers, or facilities with more plastic surgeons, whereas Roughton et al 37 showed that distances greater than 20 miles to a plastic surgeon were a negative predictor of postmastectomy breast reconstruction. These findings suggest that larger residency programs, which are often situated in tertiary care centers or academic centers with higher case volumes and reconstructive surgeons, are likely to offer robust breast reconstructive services. Consequently, residents in these larger programs may have increased operative exposure in this domain. However, a limitation of this analysis lies in our grouping of the “breast” domain. The breast category comprised clear oncological subcategories, including “absent breast” and “breast and oncological surgery,” in addition to categories “breast ptosis,” “breast macromastia,” and “breast macromastia.” Due to constraints within the ACGME case log system, we were unable to further delineate whether the latter categories were performed for oncological reconstruction, aesthetic purposes, or gender-affirming care. As such, interpreting our findings from the vantage point of purely oncological breast reconstruction should be done cautiously. Hand/nerve case volumes were similar between large and small programs, suggesting that program size alone does not substantially influence resident exposure in this category. Eberlin et al 38 surveyed members of the American Society for Surgery of the Hand (ASSH) and found that the majority of hand surgeons practice at free-standing ambulatory surgery centers (58%), university hospitals or community hospitals (41%), or at ambulatory centers associated with a general hospital (40%). As residents frequently rotate through these settings with core or community faculty, hand surgery volume is likely distributed across diverse practice environments independent of program size, allowing trainees in both large and small programs to achieve a similar operative experience. Furthermore, Silvestre et al 39 noted that variability in plastic surgery resident hand cases is affected by the intrinsic motivations of residents, timing of rotations, number of hand surgery attendings, presence of hand surgery fellows, and the program’s relationship with orthopedic surgery. Interestingly, they noted that approximately 10% of independent/combined residents did not achieve case minimums in select hand subcategories in 2015. 39 In contrast, we noted that graduating plastic surgery residents, on average, met and exceeded ACGME case minima for overall hand cases, a finding that demonstrates progress has been made. Although residents in large programs logged more aesthetic and craniofacial/head and neck cases than those in small programs, these differences were statistically insignificant. Craniofacial care, which is often complex, multidisciplinary, and resource-intensive, is typically concentrated in large academic medical centers, children’s hospitals, and urban tertiary care facilities. A 2021 study analyzing American Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Association–certified centers in the United States found that craniofacial teams were unevenly distributed across the country, with a higher concentration in metropolitan areas. 40 Although one might expect these urban centers to be affiliated with large residency programs and thus have higher case volumes for their trainees, it may not necessarily translate into increased individual resident exposure. Residents in larger complement programs may share the same operative experience, which could potentially dilute the number of craniofacial cases per resident. This effect may account for the insignificant difference in craniofacial case volumes between large and small programs and may warrant further investigation. Additionally, many high-volume craniofacial centers tend to support fellowship training programs and craniofacial fellows, which may further influence resident case availability. With regard to aesthetic case volumes, no evidence of a difference was found among residents at large or small programs. This finding is understandable when considering the underlying factors that drive aesthetic surgery volumes in the United States. Prior research has shown that geographic location, 41 patient income levels, 42 insurance payer status, 42 fluctuations in stock market indices, 43 , 44 and overall economic performance 45 all play key roles in shaping the demand for aesthetic surgery. Furthermore, many aesthetic procedures are performed in private practice settings outside of academic centers, regardless of the center’s size. Thus, resident exposure in this domain may be more dependent on practice setting, patient factors, and economic influences than the structural characteristics of residency programs, notably program size. Interestingly, residents in large and small programs logged similar case volumes within the “other” category, which included complex domains such as microvascular/free tissue transfer, burn care, and general surgery-related procedures—a necessary consolidation to facilitate meaningful analysis. These cases often involve high-acuity conditions such as severe trauma, extensive soft tissue defects, burns, and microsurgical reconstruction, which often require significant resources, specialty services, and multidisciplinary collaboration, typically available at tertiary care centers. Although such institutions are frequently affiliated with large academic training programs, the similar volume observed in this category among residents from large and small programs is somewhat unexpected. However, differences in call structure, presence of fellows, local referral patterns, and the distribution of complex cases among trainees may offset any potential institutional case volume advantages. Further substratification of this domain may elucidate whether any differences exist among or between these important subcategories. Our study has several important limitations. First, case volume does not necessarily correlate with surgical competency. Thus, it is unclear how differences in case volumes, especially when modest, may translate to resident proficiency or surgical preparedness. Further, due to limitations in the ACGME case logging system, we were unable to definitively categorize some procedural subcategories as oncological or aesthetic (ie, “breast macromastia” was grouped under the breast domain but may have included some aesthetic breast cases depending on variability in trainee logging). Despite these limitations, the findings of this study have important implications for plastic surgery education and residency programs. These results provide reassurance to trainees that evolving program structures, in particular the shift toward integrated models, have not compromised resident operative experience. By demonstrating that exposure remains stable across program size, residents and faculty can be assured that robust operative training can be achieved regardless of the number of trainees per year at an institution. For residency program directors, these data offer an objective benchmark to evaluate curricula, identify potential gaps in subspecialty training, and tailor rotations or external experiences to ensure balanced exposure. CONCLUSIONS This is the first study to correlate ACGME case logs with the program size of plastic surgery training programs. Over the 9-year period, case volumes were similar for residents overall in both large and small residency programs, thus reflecting a consistent resident operative experience regardless of program size. When stratified by program track, residents in independent and integrated pathways logged comparable case volumes. Large programs were associated with higher volumes of breast cases, whereas no detectable differences were noted for aesthetic, craniofacial/head and neck, hand/nerve, and other subcategories based on program size. The findings presented in this study may guide strategies to address disparities in case volumes and promote comprehensive, well-rounded operative training for residents across all programs. DISCLOSURES Dr. Janis receives royalties from Thieme Medical Publishers and Springer Publishing. He is also a member of the Plastic Surgery Review Committee of the ACGME. The other authors have no financial interest to declare in relation to the content of this article. ACKNOWLEDGMENT Sean O. Hogan, Chris Fox, and Yoon Soo Park are employees of the ACGME, and any opinions expressed may not necessarily reflect the views, policies, or requirements of the ACGME.