INTRODUCTION Contralateral breast cancer (CBC) is the most frequent second primary malignancy diagnosed in survivors of a first primary breast cancer (FBC) [ 1 ]. Analyses of clinical data (i.e., tumor characteristics, treatment) from Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) cancer registries show that compared with non-Hispanic White survivors of FBC, risk of second primary breast cancer (ipsilateral and contralateral combined) [ 2 – 4 ] and CBC [ 5 – 8 ] is higher in Asian American [ 2 – 6 , 8 ] and Hispanic [ 2 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 8 ] survivors. In a pooled analysis of six studies from the California Breast Cancer Survivorship Consortium (CBCSC), we have shown that even after adjustment for personal and lifestyle factors, in addition to clinical characteristics, risk of invasive CBC remained higher in Asian American and Hispanic women with a first primary breast cancer (FBC) diagnosis under age 50 years [ 9 ]. Thus, other factors must contribute to the disparities in CBC risk. It has been suggested that racial/ethnic disparities in CBC are driven by structural and social determinants that affect healthcare access, screening, and treatment [ 2 , 5 – 8 ]. The impact of these factors on CBC risk is largely unknown. In the present analysis, we investigated the role of multilevel (individual- and neighborhood-level) immigration and social factors in CBC risk among Asian American and Hispanic women with FBC. Immigration factors such as non-U.S. birthplace, non-English language preference at interview, and low language acculturation have been associated with higher risk of FBC in Asian American [ 10 ] and Hispanic [ 11 ] women, although in more recent birth cohorts of Asian American women, we observed higher FBC risk associated with non-U.S. vs. U.S. birthplace and English vs. non-English language preference [ 12 , 13 ]. Immigration-related factors have not been evaluated with risk of CBC, and findings on the associations of neighborhood-level social factors with risk of CBC or second primary breast cancer are inconsistent [ 7 , 14 – 17 ]. Immigration and social factors may impact CBC risk through multiple pathways, including access to breast cancer screening, timeliness of diagnosis, tumor characteristics, treatment decisions, lifestyle, and neighborhood context. In the present analysis, we investigated the link between immigration and social factors and CBC risk through their adverse effects on stage of FBC. Immigration and social factors have been linked to later-stage FBC [ 18 – 23 ] and may reflect inadequate screening, resulting from limited access to screening (e.g., health insurance status), and limited healthcare resources (e.g., mammography facilities), or lower adherence to screening recommendations [ 24 ]. Later-stage FBC is more frequently diagnosed in some Asian American ethnic groups and Hispanic women than non-Hispanic White women [ 25 , 26 ]. Furthermore, later-stage FBC has been associated with higher risk of CBC in some SEER cancer registry analyses [ 4 , 7 , 27 ]. Based on these observations, we hypothesized that associations between immigration and social factors and CBC risk may in part be mediated by FBC stage ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). Inadequate screening leading to higher-stage FBC may be particularly exacerbated in populations with limited English proficiency and/or cultural factors that may be incongruent with available preventive care. Leveraging a rich harmonized dataset from the California Breast Cancer Survivorship Consortium (CBCSC) [ 9 ] that covered multiple domains of immigration and social factors, we investigated associations of individual-level (birthplace, language preference, education) and neighborhood-level [ethnic enclave, racial/ethnic composition, and socioeconomic status (SES)] factors with risk of CBC. We hypothesized that non-U.S. birthplace, non-English language preference, lower education, and residence in ethnic enclaves, neighborhoods with predominantly minoritized populations, or low-SES neighborhoods are associated with higher CBC risk and that the associations between these factors and risk of CBC may in part be mediated by FBC stage. MATERIALS AND METHODS Study sample and outcomes The analysis was based on harmonized data from six studies that comprise the CBCSC cohort [ 28 , 29 ] ( Supplementary Table 1 ), including three case-control studies [ 11 , 30 , 31 ], a family-based study of breast cancer [ 32 ], a breast cancer survivor cohort [ 33 ], and a general population cohort [ 34 ]. The contributing studies and the analysis were approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the contributing institutions and the California State Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects. All participants completed written informed consent prior to the study interview or provided implied consent by completing the mailed questionnaire. The studies have been conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Survivors were diagnosed with FBC at age 18–79 years from 1993 through 2009. We limited the study sample to women with non-metastatic FBC (stage I-III) since mortality is high for stage IV FBC. Incident FBC were ascertained through regional cancer registries that report to the California Cancer Registry and the SEER cancer registry program. After exclusions ( Supplementary Figure 2 ), the pooled dataset included 9,639 FBC survivors without a bilateral mastectomy at FBC diagnosis who self-identified as African American, Asian American, Hispanic, non-Hispanic White, or other race/ethnicity [ 28 ]. Of these, 1,888 were Asian American and 2,381 were Hispanic and self-reported where they were born. Linkage with the California Cancer Registry and follow-up through 2020 or 2019 for the Multiethnic Cohort (MEC) identified 131 invasive CBC in Asian American and 135 invasive CBC in Hispanic survivors. As in other studies [ 3 , 35 , 36 ], we limited the analysis to invasive stage I-IV CBC diagnosed 180 days after FBC diagnosis to minimize the inclusion of metastases that are misclassified as CBC. Data collection and study variables Data on FBC tumor characteristics [stage, grade, histology, tumor size, nodal involvement, estrogen receptor (ER) status, progesterone receptor (PR) status], first-course treatment of FBC (surgery type, radiation therapy, chemotherapy), and marital status at the time of FBC diagnosis were obtained from the California Cancer Registry. Later-stage was defined as AJCC stage II and III for FBC and stage II, III and IV for CBC; early-stage was defined as stage I. The contributing studies collected data on breast cancer risk factors by structured questionnaires in English, Spanish, Cantonese and/or Mandarin. Variables were harmonized according to common definitions developed for the CBCSC [ 28 ]. Questionnaire-based variables refer to risk factor status in the reference year, defined as the year before FBC diagnosis in the case-control and family-based studies; the year of questionnaire completion in the breast cancer survivor cohort, on average 1.8 years after FBC diagnosis; and the year of enrollment in the general population cohort, on average 6.9 years before FBC diagnosis. Pre-diagnosis body mass index (BMI) was calculated as self-reported weight (kg) divided by self-reported height (m) squared. In the Asian American Breast Cancer Study (AABCS) and San Francisco Bay Area Breast Cancer Study (SFBCS), missing self-reported height was replaced with height measured at interview. BMI (kg/m 2 ) was categorized as underweight or normal weight ( 25), overweight (25- 30), or obesity (≥30) for Hispanic women, and as underweight or normal weight ( 23), overweight (23- 27.5), or obesity (≥27.5) for Asian American women according to cut-points suggested for Asian populations [ 37 ]. Cigarette smoking history in the reference year was classified as never, former, or current smoking. Alcohol consumption was based on the reported consumption of wine, beer or hard liquor in the reference year. Missing data for clinical and other factors were categorized as unknown and included in the analyses. Multilevel (individual and neighborhood) immigration and social factors Immigration and social factors at the individual-level were based on questionnaires and those at the neighborhood-level were based on attributes of the census tract where women resided at the time of FBC diagnosis. Latitude and longitude coordinates of the residential address at FBC diagnosis were available from the California Cancer Registry and assigned to census tracts to which we appended 1990, 2000, or 2010 U.S. Census data, depending on year of FBC diagnosis (i.e., if diagnosis year was 1986–1995 then appended to 1990 data; 1996–2005 to 2000 and 2006–2015 to 2010). We used census data assembled in the California Neighborhoods Data System [ 38 ]. Excluding 182 addresses that were insufficient for geocoding, neighborhood data were available for 1,801 FBC and 126 CBC in Asian American women and 2,286 FBC and 123 CBC in Hispanic women. Immigration factors included individual-level birthplace (U.S.-born, non-U.S.-born) and language preference for the study questionnaire (English, Spanish, Cantonese/Mandarin) and neighborhood-level ethnic enclave (enclave, non-enclave). Social factors included education as a proxy measure of individual SES, neighborhood SES (nSES), a composite measure of seven neighborhood characteristics, and neighborhood racial/ethnic composition. Neighborhood factors were operationalized as described in Supplementary Table 2 . Ethnic enclaves are ethnically and culturally distinct neighborhoods defined by a higher concentration of residents who are from specific racial/ethnic groups, are non-U.S.-born or recent immigrants, have limited English proficiency, and are linguistically isolated [ 38 ]. These measures were developed using principal component analyses for Asian American and Hispanic enclave indices separately for each decennial year. The Asian enclave measure included percent Asian American/Pacific Islander residents, percent recent immigrants, percent residents with low English proficiency who speak Asian/Pacific Islander language, and percent households that are limited-English speaking and speak Asian/Pacific Islander language. The Hispanic enclave measure included percent Hispanic residents, percent non-U.S.-born residents, percent recent immigrants, percent households that are limited-English speaking, precent households that are limited-English speaking and speak Spanish, percent residents with low English proficiency, and percent residents with low English proficiency who speak Spanish. Measures of ethnic enclave quintiles were dichotomized as enclave (state-wide quintiles 4–5) vs. non-enclave (quintiles 1–3). Neighborhood racial/ethnic composition was determined according to the proportions of African American, Asian American/Pacific Islander, Hispanic, and non-Hispanic White populations [ 39 ] and categorized as predominantly minoritized population or mixed population. nSES is an established composite index based on education, income, poverty, employment, occupation, home value, and rent cost [ 40 ]. Distribution of statewide quintiles were used to group census tracts into low-SES (quintiles 1–3) vs. high-SES (quintiles 4–5) neighborhoods. Statistical analyses We compared multilevel immigration and social factors, and clinical, personal, and lifestyle characteristics by birthplace (non-U.S.-born vs. U.S.-born), separately for Asian American and Hispanic women, and used chi-square tests to assess differences in distributions by birthplace. We also examined differences in distributions of FBC stage and CBC stage by immigration and social factors using chi-square tests. We used the Fine Gray competing risk model to estimate hazard ratios (HR) and 95%CI for the association of CBC risk with multilevel immigration and social factors [ 41 ]. Models were conducted separately for Hispanic and Asian American survivors. We stratified the analyses by age at FBC diagnosis ( 50 vs. ≥50 years), given higher CBC risk in women diagnosed at younger ages [ 5 , 7 ] and more pronounced racial/ethnic disparities in CBC risk in younger women [ 7 ]. Follow-up started at 181 days after FBC diagnosis and ended at the earliest of: diagnosis of CBC, occurrence of a competing event [death or other primary cancer, including ipsilateral second primary breast cancer (n=119) or second primary breast cancer with unknown laterality (n=3)], or censoring at the date of last contact or study end date of December 31, 2020 (December 31, 2019 for the MEC). Multivariable models included study (stratification variable) and were adjusted for age at FBC diagnosis (continuous), and covariates associated with CBC risk in our pooled dataset, including hormone receptor status (ER-positive and/or PR-positive, ER-negative and PR-negative, unknown) and first-degree family history of breast cancer (yes, no, unknown) [ 9 ]. Additionally, models were adjusted for FBC stage. To account for the clustering by census tract, models used a robust sandwich estimator of the covariance structure [ 42 ]. In order to evaluate whether associations of immigration and social factors with CBC risk are mediated by stage of FBC, we performed the following analyses. First, we evaluated the odds of higher-stage FBC associated with immigration and social factors. Using multivariable logistic regression, we estimated odds ratios (OR) and 95%CI in models adjusted for study, age at FBC diagnosis, year of FBC diagnosis, marital status, and BMI category. Covariates were selected a priori based on the literature [ 43 , 44 ]. Additionally, we adjusted the models for education. Second, we evaluated the association between FBC stage and CBC risk using the Fine Gray model, adjusting for study (stratification variable), age at FBC diagnosis, hormone receptor status of FBC, and first-degree family history of breast cancer. Third, we conducted a mediation analysis under the counterfactual framework, using the SAS PROC CAUSALMED implementation extended for time-to-event outcomes [ 45 ]. For immigration and social factors that were associated with CBC risk, we conducted the mediation analysis with time to CBC (event or censored) as the dependent variable, FBC stage as the mediator, adjusting for study, age at FBC diagnosis, hormone receptor status, and family history of breast cancer, and estimated the total, direct, and indirect effects on the HR scale and the percent mediated. Two-sided p-values 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Heterogeneity in associations by age group was assessed by adding interaction terms to the models and testing for significance using the Wald test. Analyses were run using SAS software version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC, USA). Data availability A de-identified dataset with the data used in this publication will be archived at Stanford University. De-identified data will be shared at the request of qualified investigators for the purpose of replicating study findings. Data requests should be addressed to the corresponding author Esther M. John at emjohn@stanford.edu and will be dependent on an approved data sharing agreement with Stanford University and agreements with the institutions that provided the data for the data pooling project. Further information is available from the corresponding author upon request. RESULTS Characteristics of Asian American and Hispanic study participants Seventy-three percent of the Asian American survivors were born outside of the U.S. compared to 48% of Hispanic survivors ( Table 1 ). Distributions of immigration and social factors differed by birthplace in both populations (p chi-square 0.01). The proportion of Asian American survivors with a college or higher degree was higher for non-U.S.-born than U.S.-born survivors (58% vs. 45%); the respective proportions for Hispanic survivors were 12% and 14%. Non-U.S.-born survivors were more likely than U.S.-born survivors to reside in an ethnic enclave at FBC diagnosis, both among Asian American (83% vs. 76%) and Hispanic (63% vs. 49%) survivors. In both populations, distributions of most clinical characteristics ( Supplementary Table 3 ) and personal or lifestyle factors ( Supplementary Table 4 ) differed by birthplace. Distribution of FBC stage and CBC stage by multilevel immigration and social factors Proportions of higher-stage (II or III) FBC were higher for non-U.S.- born than U.S.-born survivors, among both Asian American (55% vs. 44%) and Hispanic (59% vs. 51%) survivors ( Supplementary Table 5 ). Among non-U.S.-born Asian American survivors, proportions of higher-stage FBC were higher for younger than older age at FBC diagnosis (58% vs. 52%, p 0.05). For U.S.-born survivors, the difference was not statistically significant (50% vs. 42%, p≥0.05). A similar pattern was observed for Hispanic survivors, with higher proportions of higher-stage FBC among younger than older survivors (non-U.S.-born: 71% s. 51%, p 0.01; U.S.-born: 63% vs. 44%, p 0.01). The proportion of higher-stage FBC was higher for non-U.S.-born Hispanic survivors with lower education than those with higher education (61% vs. 54%, p 0.01). In both populations, FBC stage did not differ by language preference, ethnic enclave neighborhood, neighborhood racial/ethnic composition, and nSES. The proportion of later-stage CBC was higher in Hispanic (40%) than Asian American (33%) survivors ( Supplementary Table 6 ). Furthermore, in both populations, proportions of later-stage CBC were notably lower than proportions of later-stage FBC (Asian Americans: 33% vs. 52%; Hispanics: 40% vs. 55%). Differences in the proportion of stage II-IV vs. stage I CBC by age at FBC diagnosis, FBC stage, birthplace, language preference, education, and nSES were not statistically significant (all p≥0.05). Associations of multilevel immigration and social factors with risk of CBC In multivariable models for Asian American survivors, none of the individual- and neighborhood-level immigration and social factors were associated with CBC risk ( Table 2 ). For Hispanic survivors, Spanish vs. English language preference was associated with higher CBC risk (HR=1.42, 95%CI=1.00–2.04, p=0.05). Estimated associations appeared stronger for Hispanic survivors first diagnosed at age ≥50 years (HR=1.55, 95%CI=0.97–2.47, p=0.07), although heterogeneity by age did not reach statistical significance (p-heterogeneity=0.19). Additional adjustment for FBC stage only minimally altered HR estimates. Associations of multilevel immigration and social factors with FBC stage The odds of stage II/III vs. stage I FBC were higher for Asian American survivors born outside of the U.S. than those born in the U.S. (OR=1.42, 95%CI=1.12–1.78) ( Table 3 , model 2). Language preference, education, ethnic enclave status, neighborhood racial/ethnic composition, and neighborhood SES were not associated with the odds of higher-stage FBC. For Hispanic survivors, the odds of stage II/III FBC were higher for non-U.S.-born vs. U.S.-born survivors and those with Spanish vs. English language preference, and the odds were lower for survivors with higher education levels ( Table 3 , model 1). In models additionally adjusted for education ( Table 3 , model 2), ORs were attenuated for birthplace (non-U.S.-born vs. U.S.-born: HR=1.28, 95%CI=1.07–1.54) and language preference (Spanish vs. English: HR=1.32, 95%CI=1.07–1.63). Neighborhood characteristics were not associated with the odds of higher-stage FBC in either population. Mediation by FBC stage We observed no association between FBC stage and CBC risk overall or by age group ( Table 4 ). In a formal mediation analysis, we observed no evidence that FBC stage mediated the association between Spanish language preference and risk of CBC in Hispanic women ( Supplementary Table 7 ). The HRs for the total and direct effects were almost identical and percent mediated was 5.32. DISCUSSION In our pooled cohorts of Asian American and Hispanic women diagnosed with FBC in California, Spanish language preference was associated with higher risk of CBC in Hispanic survivors only. We observed no associations of CBC risk with other immigration and social factors. Non-U.S. birthplace among Asian American women and non-U.S. birthplace and Spanish language preference among Hispanic women were associated with higher odds of later-stage FBC. FBC stage did not appear to mediate the association of language preference with CBC risk in Hispanic survivors. To our knowledge, the present study is the first to examine associations of CBC risk with multilevel immigration factors. Our finding of higher CBC risk associated with non-English language preference was limited to Hispanic women and warrants confirmation in larger studies. Spanish language preference may reflect language barriers, lower acculturation, lower knowledge about cancer and screening, cultural factors that may be incongruent with preventive care, lower access to screening, and limited insurance coverage. These factors may underlie inadequate screening, leading to higher-stage FBC which is supported by our observation of higher odds of later-stage FBC associated with Spanish language preference. However, counter to our hypothesis, we observed no association between FBC stage and risk of CBC overall or by birthplace and no evidence that the association between language preference and CBC risk in Hispanic survivors was mediated by FBC stage. Thus, other factors must mediate this association. Spanish language preference also may reflect barriers to treatment that adversely impact CBC risk, such as delayed initiation of treatment or non-guideline-concordant treatment which are measures of poor quality care [ 46 ]. Lower receipt of guideline-concordant treatment for FBC has been observed for Hispanic women compared with non-Hispanic White women [ 25 , 47 , 48 ]. Among Mexican American patients in Texas, English-speaking patients were more likely to receive breast conserving surgery than Spanish-speaking patients [ 49 ]. Compared with other racial/ethnic groups, Hispanic women were less likely to initiate or to be adherent to endocrine therapy [ 50 ], which reduces CBC risk [ 51 , 52 ]. Initiation and adherence are influenced by insurance coverage and out-of-pocket medication costs [ 53 , 54 ]. We did not have detailed information on FBC treatment (i.e., type of drug, duration of use, time since last use), and so could not evaluate variation in receipt of treatment by language preference or other immigration and social factors. We observed no association between individual- and neighborhood-level social factors and CBC risk. In a SEER-wide study, CBC risk was higher in survivors who lived in low-SES neighborhoods, but nSES did not explain racial/ethnic differences in CBC risk [ 7 ]. In contrast, a California Cancer Registry study observed no association between nSES and risk of CBC [ 15 ], and in two studies conducted in England, neighborhood deprivation was not associated with risk of CBC [ 16 , 17 ]. Thus, it remains uncertain what role social factors have on CBC risk. The evaluation of FBC stage and CBC risk warrants further study, as current findings are inconsistent. In SEER-wide analyses, FBC stage IV vs. stage I was associated with higher standardized incidence ratios for CBC [ 27 ] and second primary breast cancer [ 4 ]. Another SEER analysis observed higher CBC risk for stage IIB vs. stage I FBC [ 7 ], whereas a California Cancer Registry study observed no association with CBC risk for stage III vs. stage I FBC [ 15 ]. Multivariable adjustment differed in these studies which may have contributed to the inconsistent associations. It is possible that the null association in our study for both Asian American and Hispanic survivors was due to a small sample size or the exclusion of stage IV FBC or underrepresentation of stage III FBC, possibly due to lower study participation by women with more advanced FBC or women who spoke an Asian language that was not translated in the studies contributing to the CBCSC cohort. Understanding the impact of immigration and social factors on FBC stage is important for other outcomes after FBC diagnosis. Stage has substantial influence on racial/ethnic survival disparities [ 55 ]. Consistent with findings based on cancer registry data [ 18 , 56 ], non-U.S. birthplace of both Asian American and Hispanic women was associated with higher odds of later-stage FBC in our study. However, the proportion of later-stage FBC did not vary by neighborhood factors, such as ethnic enclave, racial/ethnic composition, or nSES. These findings differ from prior studies that found later-stage FBC is more frequently diagnosed in women living in low-SES neighborhoods [ 18 ], ethnic enclaves [ 18 ], disadvantaged neighborhoods [ 57 – 59 ], and neighborhoods with lower geographic access to mammography [ 60 , 61 ]. Unlike these studies, our analysis did not include stage IV FBC and stage III FBC were likely underrepresented in our pooled CBCSC dataset [ 28 ]. It is possible that associations between neighborhood factors and later-stage FBC are only detected across the full range of FBC stage. Additionally, prior studies used different geographic scales for their neighborhood units [ 18 ] or different measures of neighborhood disadvantage [ 57 – 59 ], which could also explain the inconsistent findings. Immigration and social factors may impact follow-up care and surveillance screening after FBC diagnosis. Lower receipt of surveillance mammograms has been observed in Hispanic survivors compared with non-Hispanic White survivors [ 62 ] and in Spanish-speaking than English-speaking Hispanic survivors [ 63 ]. While we observed a higher proportion of later-stage CBC in non-U.S.-born than U.S.-born Hispanic survivors, but not in Hispanic survivors with Spanish vs. English language preference, differences by immigration and social factors were not statistically significant. In other studies, racial/ethnic disparities in CBC stage were attributed to disparities in follow-up care and surveillance mammography after FBC diagnosis [ 4 , 64 ]. The lower proportions of later-stage tumors for CBC than for FBC in our study suggest that once women receive care for their FBC, they may be more likely to receive timely surveillance screening after FBC diagnosis, resulting in diagnosis of earlier-stage CBC. The interpretation of our findings needs to consider some limitations. We had no information on mammography screening or factors associated with screening, such as insurance coverage, income, cultural barriers, knowledge about cancer, or fear of screening or a cancer diagnosis. Treatment was limited to first-course therapy and may have been under-ascertained [ 65 ]. We cannot rule out the possibility that linkage with the California Cancer Registry may have missed some CBC diagnoses in women who moved out of California after their FBC diagnosis. Sample sizes were small in analyses of CBC risk jointly stratified by race/ethnicity and age at FBC diagnosis, which may result in HR estimates of marginal statistical significance. The sample size was also too small to conduct analyses for disaggregated Asian American survivors. Study strengths include ascertainment of women with FBC primarily through population-based cancer registries which enhances the generalizability of the study findings; high racial/ethnic diversity of the study sample and large proportions of women born outside of the U.S.; assessment of race and ethnicity based on self-report, which reduces the possibility of misclassification; long follow-up for an average of 15 years with ascertainment of both early and late CBC; evaluation of personal and lifestyle risk factors not available in SEER; and harmonization of questionnaire-based variables based on common definitions. In conclusion, we found that of the multilevel immigration and social factors investigated in the present analysis, Spanish vs. English language preference was the only factor associated with higher risk of CBC. Language preference is a potential indicator of language barriers, acculturation, cultural factors, or access to screening and treatment. Hispanic women with Spanish language preference may benefit from interventions aimed at addressing challenges in access to health care and treatment that adversely impact CBC risk. Supplementary Material 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9