Introduction Benign breast disease (BBD) accounts for 75% of all breast biopsies performed in the U.S. 1 BBD is histologically classified into nonproliferative disease (NP), proliferative disease without atypia (PDWA), or atypical hyperplasia (AH), with estimated frequencies of 50.8–66.7% for NP, 22.7–42.0% for PDWA, and 3.4–7.2% for AH. 2 , 3 Women with AH are placed in a higher-risk group for breast cancer 3 – 9 and are recommended to begin annual mammogram screening as early as age 30, in accordance with National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines. 10 However, clinical management remains a challenge, particularly among racially diverse populations, where differences in breast cancer risk and limited population-specific data hinder accurate risk stratification and screening recommendations. These challenges persist in the post-mammography era, as the detection of benign breast lesions increases the number of women requiring clinical management. The current study is motivated by our prior assessment of temporal factors (i.e., age, time since benign biopsy, and menopausal status) in a cohort consisting predominantly of White women with BBD. 11 With a racially diverse cohort, our current study adds to the limited evidence that accounts for heterogeneity of BBD subtypes and subsequent breast cancer 4 – 6 , 11 – 14 —aligning with the need identified in a recent systematic review. 15 We hypothesize that breast cancer incidence is centered on the severity of proliferative lesions (i.e., AH) and modified by temporal factors. Therefore, in this racially diverse contemporary cohort, we assess breast cancer risk for women with proliferative disease without atypia and women with atypical hyperplasia compared with women diagnosed with nonproliferative disease lesions. Consistent with the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine recommendations, 16 we address how the association for AH varies by race. We do not use race and ethnicity as attributes that drive breast cancer but rather quantify risk differences across groups to strengthen the applicability of guidelines for risk management. Methods Study Sample Data were obtained from the Joanne Knight Breast Health Center at the Washington University (WashU) School of Medicine and Siteman Cancer Center, St. Louis, Missouri, with linkages to pathology and medical records. 17 Out of 114,236 women undergoing mammography screening since 2010, following the exclusion criteria outlined in Figure 1 , a total sample of 8,915 women diagnosed with histologically-confirmed benign lesions from February 4, 2010, to June 30, 2023 were available for analysis (followed until June 10, 2025). BBD diagnoses were confirmed through the pathology records at WashU Medicine, which processes all biopsies from our mammography service. For women with more than one pathology record, we selected the earliest BBD diagnosis. Per standard BBD classification, benign lesions were classified as NP, PDWA, or AH. 18 Breast cancer risk factors collected at the time of mammogram included self-reported family history of breast cancer (i.e., first-, second-degree relatives), alcohol (drinks per day, week, or month), tobacco (cigarettes per day), and ever oral contraceptive and hormone therapy use (in months). Hormonal and reproductive factors included age at menarche; number of live births and pregnancies; age at first and second birth (up to 8 th birth); and age and weight at menopause. Menopausal status was defined based on age at menopause or hysterectomy with bilateral oophorectomy. Women with hysterectomy without oophorectomy were classified as postmenopausal according to age and smoking status: 50 years for heavy smokers, 51 for 1-14 cigarettes/day, and 52 for non-smokers. 19 Women without hysterectomy information were classified similarly to postmenopausal status based on age and smoking frequency. Women self-reported as non-Hispanic White (hereafter, White); non-Hispanic Black (hereafter, Black); non-Hispanic Asian (hereafter, Asian); Hispanic; and Native American. Due to a small sample size (n = 38), we excluded Native American and Hispanic women from the race-associated breast cancer risk assessment. Additional risk factors recorded included age at baseline (based on date of birth), weight, and height. Mammographic breast density was reported based on the American College of Radiology Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System four categories (BI-RADS 5 th edition). 20 This study was approved by the WashU Institutional Review Board and prepared according to the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) research guideline for observational studies. 21 Outcome Measures and Follow-up The outcome was subsequent breast cancers (invasive and in situ) identified in the pathology records at least six months following the BBD biopsy date (index date). The 6-month cut-off minimizes the inclusion of disease-dependent outcome endpoints following the index date. Follow-up time was calculated from the index date until either the earliest occurrence of a breast cancer diagnosis, death, or end of the study follow-up (June 10, 2025). Statistical Analysis We compared age-standardized risk factors across the three levels of BBD subtypes with Pearson’s χ 2 for categorical and mean differences with the analysis of variance for continuous measures. Age-adjusted Cox proportional hazards regression was used to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the development of breast cancer comparing PDWA and AH with NP. Estimates were calculated overall and within strata of key breast cancer risk factors and race. Interaction-based heterogeneity was assessed by examining the interaction between BBD subtypes and risk factors. We used a Z-test to compare differences in log HRs within categories of risk factors for Black and White women with AH. As an exploratory analysis, we assessed associations between BBD subtypes and additional breast cancer risk factors beyond those examined in the primary models. Fully adjusted models were estimated in a sensitivity analysis. To validate the use of the Cox model for analysis, a modified flexible model was used, enabling time-dependent effects to be modeled where the proportional hazards assumption was violated. 22 Estimates from the modified model were reported if they were meaningfully different from original model estimates. Breast cancer cumulative incidence (1 minus Kaplan-Meier) curves were estimated by the level of histological category of BBD overall and for AH by race. To explore whether the type of subsequent breast cancer among cases differed by BBD subtype, we performed a sub-analysis by characterizing tumors as low- or high-risk based on available pathology data. Additional analysis for the risk of BBD subtypes compared with women without BBD is described in the supplemental materials available online. Baseline body mass index (BMI) was calculated as weight in kilograms divided by the square of height in meters (kg/m²). Missing values for weight and height (825 or 9.2%) were imputed using fully conditional specification function based on all available risk factors. Missing values for age at menarche (533 or 6.0%), number of pregnancies (32, 0.4%), age at first birth (520, 5.8%), alcohol (586, 6.6%), and tobacco use (867 or 9.7%) were imputed using the same approach. An indicator was created for 28.6% of unknown breast density values instead of imputation. AH- and PDWA-associated risks were computed exclusively on the set of completed cases within breast density categories. Risk factors with small sample sizes per individual category were dichotomized. All analyses for the present study were performed in SAS 9.4 software (Statistical Analysis System, SAS Institute Inc, Cary, North Carolina). The a priori α level used in the present analysis was p 0.05 (two-tailed). Results Of the 8,915 women diagnosed with histologically confirmed benign lesions, 63.7% were White, 32.4% Black, and 3.9% Asian race ( Table 1 ). Of all biopsies, 71.3% were classified as NP, 23.3% as PDWA, and 5.4% as AH. The mean age of women at baseline was 50 years (SD=13). Age differed significantly by NP, PDWA, and AH subtype (p 0.0001). The proportions of most breast cancer risk factors also differed significantly by histologic subtypes ( Table 1 ). Over the median duration of 6.5 years of follow-up (6–180 months), 363 women were diagnosed with breast cancer at least 6 months after the benign biopsy (74% of cases were invasive; Table 2 ). Tumors diagnosed were ER+ (78.2%) and PR+ (59.9%; Table 2 ). Among invasive cases, 11.2% were triple-negative tumors. Tumor grade and hormone receptor status differed significantly between BBD subtypes. A higher proportion of high-grade tumors (57%) was observed in the NP/PDWA group compared with the AH group (46%); p = 0.03. For ER+ and PR+ tumor status, the proportion arising from AH was significantly higher than from NP ( Table S1 ). Tumor stage, size, and HER2 status did not differ significantly between the two groups. Overall, compared with NP, risks were 1.69 (HR = 1.69, 95%CI 1.35, 2.12) for PDWA and 2.78 (HR = 2.78, 95%CI 2.01, 3.85) for AH, after adjusting for age at benign biopsy. Risk estimates were attenuated but remained similar in the fully adjusted models. These increasing levels of risk by BBD subtype were further modified by time since biopsy (≤4 vs 4 years, p het = 0.013) and menopausal status (pre vs post, p het = 0.005). Breast cancer risk for women with AH was highest for premenopausal vs postmenopausal women (HR = 5.77, 95%CI 3.48, 9.57 vs 1.87, 95%CI 1.21, 2.89) but comparable for women with PDWA regardless of menopausal status (HR = 1.84 for pre- vs 1.62 for post-menopausal women; Table 3 ). Similarly, breast cancer risk for women with AH was higher for the initial ≤4 years of follow-up vs after (HR = 5.77, 95%CI 3.48, 9.57 vs 1.84, 95%CI 1.21, 2.80 p het = 0.005) but comparable for women with PDWA regardless of the time period. We observed an association between breast cancer risk factors and the BBD subtypes for BMI ( 30 and ≥30 kg/m 2 ), family history of breast cancer, tobacco use, alcohol use, and breast density ( Table S2 ), but did not observe interaction effects for heterogeneity for these risk factors and risk of breast cancer. The cumulative risk of breast cancer by BBD subtypes was highest for AH vs PDWA or NP over the initial 10 years of follow-up (p 0.001; Figure 2 ). Age-adjusted estimates were 2.28 for NP (RR = 2.28, 95%CI 1.18, 4.40), 2.92 for PDWA (RR = 2.92, 95%CI 1.25, 6.81), and 5.66 for AH (RR = 5.66, 95%CI 1.71, 18.76) compared with women without BBD ( Table S3 ). For the race group analysis, we did not observe overall heterogeneity of BBD subtypes by race, except for an interaction between Asian women diagnosed with PDWA (p interaction = 0.023). Breast cancer risk was higher for premenopausal Black vs White women with AH (HR = 13.42, 95%CI 5.32, 33.91 vs 3.33, 95%CI 1.70, 6.52, p = 0.017; Table 3 ), when adjusting for age at benign biopsy. This higher risk persisted during the initial 4 years after biopsy (HR = 7.87, 95%CI 3.88, 15.95 vs 3.05, 95%CI 1.81, 5.11, p = 0.033; Table 3 ). The cumulative risk of breast cancer was consistently higher over the initial 10 years of follow-up for Black compared with White women with AH but did not reach statistical significance (p = 0.440; Figure 3 ). Discussion In this contemporary cohort of women with histologically-confirmed benign lesions, we confirmed the overall higher risk of breast cancer after AH than after PDWA. 3 , 5 , 6 , 14 These increasing levels of risk by BBD subtype were further amplified for AH by temporal factors—such that earlier times since benign biopsy and being premenopausal resulted in higher risk. These findings suggest that early surveillance after AH diagnosis may be important. Risk was substantially elevated during earlier time since biopsy and among premenopausal Black women compared to White women, although the small number of cases warrants careful interpretation of the observed findings and further study. In this cohort, Asian women diagnosed with PDWA had a higher risk of BBD-associated breast cancer, with lower risk estimates observed among White and Black women. A similar magnitude of risk for PDWA was reported in one study among Asian women in Japan who were biopsied before the 2000s, 23 when compared with women from the general population. Another Japanese study also reported a risk estimate of similar magnitude to ours, but the association was not statistically significant. 24 As in our study, the number of cases in the prior studies was limited, and it remains unclear whether the degree of epithelial proliferation without atypia disproportionately impacts breast cancer risk in Asian women compared with other racial and ethnic groups. Although limited studies also exist among Black women with BBD, 25 – 27 the inclusion of nearly 33% Black women in this study enhances the diversity of existing studies. The AH-associated breast cancer risk observed in our study is consistent with a study by Cote et al. 28 of Black women out of Detroit who were biopsied before the 2000s. We also observed an increased breast cancer risk for Black women with PDWA, which was not observed by Cote et al or other prior studies among Black women. 25 , 26 , 28 Still, the proportion of cases for Black women in our study was larger than reported in the prior studies. In the absence of sufficient power to detect interaction by race, our findings support the possibility that risk management approaches for Black and White women with BBD could be similar. However, breast cancer risk for Black and White women may be impacted by time since benign biopsy and menopausal status, adding value to tailoring surveillance strategies—especially as there is a need for individualized risk prediction to guide timely care, and current risk assessment tools are unavailable for Black women with AH. Demographic, lifestyle, and reproductive factors and breast cancer risk have been documented among samples predominantly of White women with BBD. 15 As with prior studies that reported risk differences by BBD subtype over longer follow-up, we observed earlier events after biopsy. For instance, in contrast to the majority of the long-term studies among women with BBD, we observed attenuation of risk for AH during the initial decade following a benign breast biopsy. Unlike previous studies that reported breast cancer risk to be highest after the first decade postbiopsy, 13 , 14 , 29 we observed the highest increase in risk during the earlier years postbiopsy. Our findings contribute to the observed variation in breast cancer risk over time since benign biopsy but underscore the potential need for earlier risk-reduction strategies for women with AH, especially for diverse populations. Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a differential diagnosis for atypia, and studies indicate that Black women have an elevated risk of breast cancer after DCIS compared to White women. 30 , 31 Furthermore, gene-expression and pathway analyses for subsequent breast events after DCIS show that different genes and pathways are involved in White vs Black women. 32 These biologic pathways suggest that the higher risk of early events in our study may be related to distinct biological profiles in breast cancer development between Black and White women, though additional studies of these pathways among women with AH are warranted. Although mammogram screening rates in Missouri are similar or slightly higher for Black compared to White women, but socioeconomic factors often hinder timely care for Black women. 33 Additionally, advances in 3D mammography, may have increased breast cancer detection in Black women in this cohort. We also observed that the premenopausal period significantly contributed to breast cancer development for women with AH, in contrast to the majority of existing studies, which reported similar risk levels in the pre- and post- menopausal years for women with AH. 6 , 13 , 14 , 34 However, menopausal status was categorized based on the age at BBD in some studies and self-reported in others. It is also possible that our risk estimates are higher reflecting the inclusion of premenopausal Black women with AH, who appear to have disproportionately higher risks of breast cancer during their premenopausal years. In terms of lifestyle or reproductive risk factors, while there was no heterogeneity in the risk across BBD subtypes, we observed a statistically significant association between both PDWA and AH (compared with NP) and breast cancer for BMI, tobacco use, and number of pregnancies—not previously reported within studies on BBD subtype. 4 , 26 , 35 – 37 Among the studies that reported breast cancer risk for BBD subtypes, 18 , 38 , 39 nearly half 14 , 40 reported a positive association for AH among women with a family history of breast cancer. As with nearly all the existing studies, we were also unable to stratify family history of breast cancer by the degree of family relation, potentially obscuring important differences in risk. This study is not without limitations. Compared with previous BBD studies in predominantly white women, we had a shorter follow-up but observed a comparable number of breast cancer cases to those reported in more recent studies with longer follow-ups. 3 , 6 The shorter time to event observed in this cohort is consistent with patterns seen for DCIS cohort among Black and other minority women in SEER. 30 Additionally, the recent DCIS molecular profile study that identified racial differences in gene expression and tumor pathways between Black and White women could explain earlier onset of breast events in this study. 41 Although we had limited power to detect race interaction by BBD subtype, we observed heterogeneity of risk factor associations with a representative sample of Black women, enhancing the generalizability of our findings and contributing to the limited diversity in existing population studies. 26 , 28 , 42 Still, breast cancer risk among women with BBD remains understudied among women of other races and ethnicities. A combined risk estimate for atypical ductal and lobular hyperplasia in this study may mask important differences in breast cancer risk that we previously reported for a cohort predominantly of White women. 13 Exploratory analyses, in which lobular carcinoma in situ was assessed apart from AH in a single high-risk group, demonstrated further heterogeneity in risk and confirmed that separate assessment, when possible, allows for a clearer and more clinically meaningful delineation of risk ( Table S4 and Figure S1 ). The association between multiple biopsies and breast cancer risk suggests that in this cohort of women, having more than one biopsy does not provide additional risk discrimination once histological subtype information is considered. Factors examined in this study (e.g., menopausal status and family history of breast cancer) are well-established risk factors for breast cancer in the general female population. However, due to limited data—especially by BBD subtype—it remains unclear whether these risks apply equally to all women, especially in a diverse population. Given that women with BBD already represent a population at increased risk of breast cancer, our findings confirm that the risk is increased significantly by histological subtype, and this risk varies with temporal factors. Our findings for a racially diverse cohort reveal that the risks following benign biopsy may be further amplified in non-White populations—particularly for Black women. This highlights the need for inclusive risk stratification across populations. Achieving such stratification requires more precise and consistent characterization of benign breast disease. We previously showed possible improvement in breast cancer risk classification by including BBD subtypes; 43 yet, the future use of advanced imaging and AI-driven computational pathology has the potential to reduce variability in pathology classification and further enhance risk assessment accuracy for women with BBD by enabling more comprehensive and consistent classification of benign biopsy lesions. Supplementary Material Supplemental