Introduction Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the seventh most common cancer in the world, arising from the epithelial lining of the oral cavity, pharynx, and larynx ( 1 ). Worldwide, HNSCC accounts for 4% of cancer diagnoses and deaths, with around 800,000 new cases and 400,000 deaths in 2020 ( 2 ). In the United States, a combined 72,680 new cases and 16,680 deaths for cancers of the oral cavity, pharynx, and larynx are projected to occur in 2025( 3 ). The primary risk factors for HNSCC are tobacco and alcohol use, which are primarily associated with tumors of the oral cavity, larynx, and hypopharynx, as well as viral infection of human papillomavirus (HPV), which is associated with oropharyngeal cancer ( 1 ). HPV-positive HNSCC differs from HPV-negative tumors, where the latter displays elevated mutational loads and chromosomal irregularities, along with varying copy number alterations (CNAs) ( 4 ). HNSCC exhibits significant survival disparities among self-identified race and ethnicity (SIRE) and genetic ancestry (GA) groups ( 5 ). In HNSCC, African Americans (AAs) have both higher incidence rates and exhibit worse overall survival compared to European Americans (EA) ( 5 , 6 ). The median survival for AA patients is significantly shorter at 2.5 years compared to 4.8 years for EAs ( 6 ). This disparity persists even when socioeconomic confounders, access to care, and tumor stage are minimized, showing AAs still have poor overall survival, relapse-free survival, and a higher probability of local-regional failure ( 7 , 8 ). This disparity is multifaceted, arising from both biological determinants of health – such as genetic and molecular differences- and structural/socioeconomic determinants of health, including access to care and environmental exposures ( 9 – 15 ). Existing literature has focused mainly on using SIRE and ethnicity as proxies for patient ancestry, which may aid socioeconomic analyses but does not paint a full picture when trying to uncover the biological and genetic mechanisms contributing to disparities in HNSCC. Race and ethnicity are self-ascribed or socially ascribed identities based on perceived phenotypic differences and cultural identification. As social constructs, racial categories lack an objective biological definition and can vary temporally, geographically, and culturally( 16 ). Where race is often treated as a set of discrete categories, human genetic diversity exists along a continuum. Hence, racial categories are ultimately oversimplifications, and although they correlate with genetic ancestry (GA), they do not map one-to-one ( 17 , 18 ). GA is the proportion of an individual’s DNA inherited from geographically distinct ancestral populations and is determined through genomic analysis( 18 , 19 ). Such analyses infer GA by comparing an individual’s genome with reference populations and identifying single-nucleotide polymorphisms that exhibit different allele frequencies across populations ( 17 ). Common genetic ancestry groups include European (EUR), East Asian (EAS), African (AFR), and Native/Indigenous (NAT), which reflect broad population genetic lineages rather than sociopolitical identities. In the context of cancer, GA in place of SIRE can broaden our knowledge of ancestry-specific differences. Leveraging data primarily from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), this review aims to provide a comprehensive analysis of the role of genetic ancestry in the molecular characterization of HNSCC. As dedicated studies are limited, this work emphasizes pan-cancer analyses that include HNSCC and examines the characteristics of HNSCC subsites within the larger cohort. Survival Outcomes Survival outcomes for HNSCC patients vary significantly across different ancestral groups. AFR HNSCC patients exhibit significantly worse overall survival compared to EUR patients, with a hazard ratio (HR) of 2.01 (95% confidence interval (CI) of 1.23–3.28), indicating AFR patients have more than double the risk of death( 5 ). EAS and admixed American (AMR) patients, the latter of which have a complex genetic makeup primarily derived from EUR, NAT, and AFR populations, both exhibit worse overall survival and increased risk of cancer death compared to EUR patients, yet do not reach levels of significance ( 5 ). This disparity is also evident within specific HNSCC subtypes. In oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), overall survival is also significantly lower in AFR patients compared to EUR patients ( 20 ). Additionally, the percentage of patients who completely responded to treatment was significantly higher in EUR patients than in AFR patients ( 20 ). This categorical comparison distinctly outlines the survival outcomes of these major ancestry groups. Leveraging the use of ancestry to explore more nuanced associations between specific ancestral components and survival, researchers have also modeled ancestry as a continuous variable. This approach revealed that a 10% increase in AFR or NAT ancestry is associated with a 9% and 36% higher risk of mortality, respectively ( 5 ). This continuous approach allows for a more granular understanding of how incremental changes in ancestral composition relate to survival outcomes. Larger continental groupings, such as EUR, EAS, and AFR, can also be examined at finer scales to understand subcontinental genetic variation. To explore the influence of high genetic diversity within Africa on cancer survival disparities, researchers examined the effect of African subcontinental ancestry on risk of mortality for TCGA HNSCC patients with greater than 50% of AFR genetic ancestry. The three African subcontinental ancestry proportions (West Africa, West Central Africa, and Southwest Africa) did not reveal any significant differences in risk of mortality ( 5 ); however, the analysis was limited by a small sample size. Further research comparing Black HNSCC patients from Africa, the Caribbean, and the United States would provide a more comprehensive analysis of genetic diversity within the global Black population to address distinctions that have previously been overlooked. This level of granularity underscores a key advantage of GA over race-based classifications, as the latter are broad and culturally variable, whereas GA allows for a more precise, unchanging, and biologically relevant assessment of population differences. Somatic Mutations and Differential Mutational Signatures Genetic mutations play a pivotal role in the development and progression of HNSCC by altering key cellular processes that lead to tumor development. While individual somatic mutations represent discrete genomic events, mutational signatures reflect the cumulative activity of underlying mutational processes, including DNA damage, DNA repair deficiencies, and environmental exposures. The primary HNSCC characterization from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), which analyzed 279 individuals with 172 tumors from the oral cavity, 33 tumors from the oropharynx and 72 tumors from the larynx, identified the most frequently mutated genes, such as TP53 (72%), FAT1 (23%), CDKN2A (22%), PIK3CA (21%), and NOTCH1 (19%) in patients with the primary HNSCC diagnosis ( 21 ). Among these, FAT1 is of significant interest in the context of ancestry-dependent survival patterns. In HNSCC, FAT1 mutations are predominantly nonsense and missense mutations that reduce or cause the complete loss of its expression, representing discrete driver events rather than broader mutational processes ( 22 ). These mutations lead to increased cell growth and proliferation ( 22 ). However, the prognostic role of FAT1 mutations appears to be complex and may be influenced by patient ancestry. Among TCGA HNSCC patients in the oral subsite, AFR patients with FAT1 mutations (16%) were associated with significantly better overall survival compared to wild-type patients, a trend not observed among mutated EUR patients (23%) ( 20 ). These findings are contradicted by a separate analysis conducted on the a combined HNSCC cohort (n=606; 552 White and 54 African American) including patients from the TCGA dataset, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard dataset, Johns Hopkins University dataset, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) dataset, and National University of Singapore dataset, consisting of patients from all HNSCC sites, which reported that self-identified Black patients with FAT1 mutations (10.6%) demonstrated worse overall survival compared to their wild-type counterparts, whereas the survival of wild-type Black patients was more similar to both mutated and wild-type White patients ( 23 ). Conflicting results from these separate analyses may point to FAT1 mutations being a protective factor only in the oral cavity subtype, as in a recent study, FAT1 expression has been reported to be upregulated in OSCC and may act as an oncogene, not a tumor suppressor, as has been reported in HNSCC ( 24 , 25 ). Together, these findings suggest that the prognostic impact of FAT1 mutations may be context-dependent, varying by anatomical subsite and patient ancestry, rather than reflecting differences in global mutational processes. More robust analyses using larger cohorts of patients of African descent are needed to clarify the implications of FAT1 mutations for patient survival in different HNSCC subtypes. In contrast to discrete somatic mutations, ancestry-associated variation in DNA repair gene expression may influence mutational processes in HNSCC. Ramakodi et al. examined genome-wide ancestry-informative SNPs in DNA repair genes among laryngeal and oral cavity TCGA patients. This analysis led to the identification of five ancestry-related SNPs in the DNA Polymerase B (POLB) gene as cis-eQTLs, revealing that homozygous individuals with the AFR allele exhibited increased gene expression and worse overall survival ( 26 ). POLB encodes for an enzyme involved in base excision repair, one of the key pathways to repair single-base damage due to alkylation, deamination, and oxidation ( 27 ). As POLB plays a central role in base excision repair, altered expression may influence the spectrum and accumulation of single-base substitutions over time, thereby contributing to differences in mutational signatures observed across ancestry groups. Further work investigating the effects of POLB overexpression in HNSCC revealed an association with low infiltration of immune cells, low expression of immune checkpoint genes, and low expression of innate immune signaling genes ( 28 ). Collectively, these findings suggest that elevated POLB expression may contribute to therapeutic resistance and an immunosuppressive tumor environment. Strategies aimed at reducing POLB expression could be a promising therapeutic approach. More broadly, these findings emphasize how ancestry-related alleles can impact gene expression in HNSCC. Several studies have revealed significant ancestry-associated differences in the frequency of mutations in specific genes, as well as in broader mutational patterns across the genome. Research by Lee et al. identified 20 genes with distinct mutation rates, highlighting PIK3CA as having a significantly higher mutation frequency in EUR patients compared to AFR patients ( 5 ). This result is corroborated by findings from Mezghani et al. and Yuan et al. UNC13C and KMT2D are among the most frequently mutated genes in AFR HNSCC patients ( 5 , 29 ). Additionally, AFR patients have a higher frequency of TP53 and FBXW7 mutations compared to EUR patients ( 29 – 31 ). HNSCC is a heterogeneous disease, with each primary site having distinct molecular and clinical characteristics; therefore, mutational profiles vary by anatomical sites ( 32 ). The genes with the highest mutation frequencies in each HNSCC subsite are summarized in Table 1 . In OSCC, the mutational signature of EUR patients largely mirrors the overall mutational profile of the entire HNSCC TCGA cohort. This is directly attributable to the demographic composition of the TCGA dataset, in which EUR patients and the oral cavity subsite are highly represented (85% and 76%, respectively). This observation points to the critical need for genomic studies to include a broader range of ancestries and subsites to uncover genes and develop therapeutics with wider clinical applicability. Tumor mutational burden (TMB), a quantitative measurement for the number of somatic mutations within a tumor’s genome and a proxy for underlying mutational processes rather than individual driver events, has emerged as a promising biomarker for predicting a patient’s response to immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) ( 33 ). Clinical evidence indicates that patients with high-TMB generally exhibit favorable responses to treatment ( 34 ). In HNSCC, self-reported African American patients have significantly higher TMB compared to self-reported white patients ( 35 ). This trend has also been reported in other cancer types, such as non-small cell lung cancer and prostate cancer ( 36 , 37 ). However, TMB for non-European patients is often inflated due to comparisons of tumor DNA to a reference genome that is primarily based on EUR individuals, leading to a misclassification of common germline variants as somatic mutations ( 38 ). A large-scale study accounting for this bias found that in many cancer types, the difference in TMB between ancestry groups disappeared, with the exception of HNSCC ( 38 ). This suggests a potential underlying biological difference unique to HNSCC and warrants further investigation as a potential factor in disparate outcomes among non-European patients. Nevertheless, TMB does not appear to explain survival disparities between ancestry groups, as the opposite trend is observed in treatment response, where patients with high TMB, particularly African Americans, do not exhibit improved outcomes. This further points to the need for alternative biological metrics that more accurately correlate with treatment response across diverse populations. Copy Number Alterations Copy number alterations (CNAs), which involve gains or losses of large segments of the genome, play a critical role in HNSCC by driving oncogene amplification and tumor suppressor deletion. AFR patients have significantly higher overall somatic copy number than EUR patients ( 30 ). Compared with the EUR patients, the AFR patients have higher frequencies of amplifications and deletions ( 29 ). Notably, approximately 40% of AFR HNSCC tumors have deletions in tumor suppressor genes CDKN2A and CDKN2B ( 29 ). These genes are known to inhibit the activation of cyclin-dependent kinases and halt the cell cycle ( 39 ). Additionally, approximately 25% of AFR HNSCC tumors have amplifications in ANO1 and CTTN ( 29 ). ANO1 promoter methylation is linked to poor prognosis in HNSCC ( 40 ). CTTN overexpression has been implicated in cell migration and invasion in OSCC ( 41 ). In addition, AFR patients have increased CCNE1 amplifications ( 30 ). CCNE1 encodes the protein cyclin E1, which forms a complex with cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2) and allows the cell to progress into the S phase of the cell cycle ( 39 , 42 ). In HNSCC, CCNE1 is overexpressed, and its knockdown leads to reduced colony formation ( 43 ). Lastly, FADD and PPFIA1 are amplified in 25% of AFR HNSCC patients ( 29 ). These genes are located within the 11q13 amplicon, a genomic region with frequent amplifications in HNSCC, and their overexpression in HNSCC has been associated with poor survival and invasion ( 44 – 46 ). These findings emphasize the critical role of CNAs in the pathogenesis of HNSCC and highlight the role ancestry plays. Further investigation into how one’s ancestry impacts the genes within the 11q13 amplicon region could provide a further understanding of the survival disparity seen in HNSCC. Chromosomal instability (CIN) results in both structural and numerical chromosomal abnormalities and has been associated with poor prognosis, metastasis, and therapeutic resistance ( 47 ). Carter et al. developed a gene signature to characterize CIN in tumor samples that could be used to predict patient outcome, called the CIN70 signature, comprised of genes involved in cell cycle regulation and DNA repair ( 48 ). In HNSCC, AFR patients exhibit significantly higher levels of chromosomal instability compared to EUR patients ( 30 ). The relationship between CIN and ancestry in HNSCC suggests that high CIN may be a significant factor contributing to the poor outcomes seen in this population ( 30 ). Differential gene expression Differential gene expression, influenced by genomic ancestry, plays a crucial role in HNSCC. Two independent studies, both analyzing TCGA HNSCC patient data, have investigated these differences. Lee et al. identified 443 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between AFR and EUR patients, the majority of which were upregulated in EUR patients ( 5 ). Key genes distinguishing AFR ancestry were identified after controlling for various clinical factors with a multiple linear regression analysis. This highlighted the protein-coding cathepsin W (CTSW) gene and a long noncoding RNA transcript ( AC005330.1 ). CTSW expression was downregulated in AFR patients, and its downregulation was associated with an increased risk of mortality, while AC005330.1 was overexpressed in the AFR group and associated with a decreased risk of mortality. Mezghani et al.’s analysis corroborated these findings, identifying 150 DEGs, including CTWS, which also exhibited decreased expression in AFR patients ( 29 ). Multiple studies have reported the prognostic and diagnostic value of CTSW in various cancers. In pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and breast cancer, CTSW expression was associated with patient survival ( 49 , 50 ). Moreover, in endometrial cancer, CTSW positively correlates with the tumor infiltration levels of B cells, CD8+ T cells, CD4+ T cells, macrophages, and dendritic cells ( 51 ). These studies underscore the significance of CTSW in cancer prognosis and its potential use as a biomarker to personalize care. To further investigate ancestry-driven differential gene expression, both studies independently performed a gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) on their gene sets. These analyses found that compared to EUR patients, genes downregulated in AFR patients were primarily linked to pathways associated with KRAS activation, early estrogen response, apical junction complex formation, and myogenesis ( 5 ). GSEA also showed positive enrichment, or higher gene expression, for beta-catenin signaling and negative enrichment, decreased expression, for inflammatory response, IFNα response, and IFNγ response in AFR HNSCC patients ( 29 ). These findings point to fundamental differences in oncogenic and immunological mechanisms that may drive HNSCC progression in different ancestry groups and highlight the need for ancestry-informed approaches in the diagnosis and treatment of HNSCC. In the oral cavity subtype, pathway analysis revealed that c-MYC is upregulated in AFR patients ( 29 ). This was further validated by IHC staining, where tumors from AFR patients showed higher c-MYC expression compared with European patients, which was coupled with reduced disease-free survival. Given c-MYC’s role as a master regulator of cell proliferation and genomic instability, as well as influencing the tumor microenvironment, its overexpression may contribute to more aggressive tumor phenotypes and poorer outcomes observed in this group ( 52 ). Together, these findings reinforce the concept that ancestry-associated transcriptional programs influence key oncogenic drivers, such as c-MYC and CTSW, ultimately shaping tumor biology and clinical behavior in HNSCC. Continued integration of ancestry-informed molecular profiling into clinical research will be critical for uncovering actionable targets and reducing disparities in patient outcomes. DNA methylation DNA methylation, a key epigenetic modification, plays a significant role in HNSCC by altering gene expression, driving tumorigenesis, regulating the tumor microenvironment, and affecting treatment response ( 53 ). Emerging evidence indicates that methylation patterns are shaped, in part, by genomic ancestry, contributing to ancestral variation in tumor biology and clinical outcomes. Comparative methylation profiling of TCGA HNSCC patients, identifying differentially methylated genes in AFR patients, is summarized in Table 2 . This analysis has revealed that AFR patients exhibit hypermethylation at several loci relative to EUR patients, including the genes PLEKHN1 and SFRP1, whose expression is expected to be downregulated in AFR patients by promoter hypermethylation ( 29 ). Notably, PLEKHN1 is implicated in apoptosis through its interactions with pro-apoptotic proteins, and its knockout has been associated with cancer cell survival in colon cancer models ( 54 ). Similarly, SFRP1 downregulation has been associated with poor prognosis ( 55 ). In HNSCC, SFRP1 was shown to interact with cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and inhibit cell proliferation and migration ( 56 ). Hypomethylated genes in AFR patients include CALCR, which has been reported to be upregulated in many cancers and to promote cell proliferation and migration ( 29 , 57 ). Researchers further investigated differential methylation in OSCC. Between the EUR and AFR patients, 75 differentially methylated sites were identified, five of which were found to be associated with prognosis ( 20 ). Methylation of one CpG site, cg20469139, in the RNF125 gene, also correlated with PDL-1 and Caspase-7 expression. RNF125 is known to inhibit cell proliferation and be involved in PTEN signaling, and in tongue cancer cell lines, overexpression of RNF135 inhibited cell viability, proliferation, and invasion ( 58 ). This suggests hypomethylation at this site, and subsequent increased expression of RNF125 could be protective in OSCC. The combination of these findings emphasizes the importance of DNA methylation patterns in the context of GA. The distinctions observed in these groups not only have granted us mechanistic insights but also have implications for diagnostic potential and therapeutic targeting. Understanding the epigenetic modifications specific to each ancestry will aid in the development of more personalized and effective treatments for these populations. Clinical Implications Ancestry-associated differences in tumor biology may have important clinical implications by highlighting opportunities to refine treatments and identify novel therapeutic vulnerabilities. Overexpression of DNA repair genes, such as POLB, may influence tumor sensitivity to DNA-damaging agents, including cisplatin, one of the most commonly used chemotherapeutic agents for HNSCC ( 59 ). Loss of core base excision repair proteins such as POLB, XRCC1, and PARP1 has been reported to increase sensitivity to cisplatin ( 60 ). Similarly, DNA damage induced by radiotherapy is mainly repaired by base excision repair, indicating that overexpression of POLB may reduce sensitivity to radiotherapy ( 61 ). These findings suggest that patients with high POLB expression may achieve better outcomes through alternative therapeutics, such as directly targeting enzymes involved in base-excision repair. Specifically, inhibitors of Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), which interacts with POLB, may show promise when combined with cisplatin and radiotherapy in overcoming resistance ( 62 ). Ancestry-associated enrichment of specific genomic alterations may also inform targeted therapies. For instance, CCNE1 amplifications, which drive cell cycle progression through CDK2 activation, have been associated with aggressive tumor behavior and resistance to standard therapies ( 63 , 64 ). Identification of these alterations in ancestry-enriched subsets raises the possibility of exploiting cell cycle vulnerabilities through CDK2 inhibition. Several CDK2 inhibitors are currently undergoing clinical evaluation. For example, the inhibitor INCB123667 has demonstrated 14% of patients with CCNE1 amplifications had either a complete or a partial response ( 65 ). Other emerging agents have shown varying degrees of efficacy, with PF-07220060 and PF-07104091 reporting partial responses in 27.8% and 18.8% of patients, respectively, while INX-315 and BG-68501 showed more modest efficacy, with 7% and 4.2% of patients demonstrating partial response ( 65 ). These clinical data suggest that targeting CCNE1 amplifications is a promising step toward precision medicine, where biomarker-driven therapies can lead to favorable outcomes. Emerging evidence suggests that genetic ancestry may be a significant determinant of the tumor immune microenvironment, influencing immune cell infiltration, cytokine signaling, and expression of immune checkpoint molecules ( 20 , 66 ). These ancestry-associated immune profiles may modulate responsiveness to immunotherapy, potentially explaining the variability in clinical outcomes. More specifically, compared to EUR patients, AFR patients have been reported to exhibit a more immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment ( 20 , 67 ). This is often characterized by a lack of infiltrating immune cells, including T cells, which have been linked to reduced sensitivity to immunotherapy ( 68 ). Further characterization of the HNSCC tumor microenvironment across diverse ancestries is needed to determine how current immunotherapeutic strategies can be optimized to bridge the existing survival disparities. Conclusion Analyses of the genomic landscape of HNSCC reveal the complex interplay between genetic background and disease characteristics, highlighting significant differences in survival outcomes and molecular profiles ( Figure 1 ). The observed molecular differences have significant clinical implications. Ancestry-specific mutations and expression profiles can enhance risk stratification, while identified genes and methylation sites, such as POLB, a gene upregulated in AFR HNSCC patients, can offer new diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers and more targeted therapeutic approaches. The molecular characterization of HNSCC with the inclusion of genomic ancestry reveals a stark underrepresentation of EAS and NAT populations. The existing literature primarily focuses on the EUR and AFR populations, with one study attributing the exclusion of EAS and NAT populations to low sample sizes ( 20 ). Notably, many studies that aim to characterize the genomic landscape of HNSCC use patients from TCGA, which lack representation of individuals from various populations. Out of the 10,678 TCGA patients across 33 cancers, almost 9,000, or 84% of them, are of European descent ( 31 ). Similar trends are observed in the TCGA HNSCC cohort, where 85% of patients are of European descent ( 31 ). This overrepresentation contrasts with the national average of self-reported white Americans in the United States, which is 63%. Moreover, less than half of these cancers have 10 or more EAS patients, with EAS HNSCC patients representing only (6%) of the cohort ( 31 ). Given the critical role of genomic ancestry in biological studies, increasing the representation of diverse genomic cohorts and genomic databases would improve the rigor and efficacy of analytical approaches, ultimately improving the discovery of novel biomarkers in underrepresented groups. In this review, we highlight key molecular differences among ancestry groups. These findings must be interpreted with caution due to the limited sample size. Overinterpreting reported differences risks both overstating the certainty of variants found in smaller cohorts and missing biologically relevant, ancestry-specific drivers in certain populations due to insufficient statistical power. Therefore, while reported differences are essential starting points, a definitive characterization of the HNSCC genomic landscape in AFR, EAS, and NAT populations remains elusive until the use of significantly larger and more balanced cohorts. Although HNSCC displays significant survival disparities, there is little work that considers the interplay of genomic ancestry and cancer development. Additional biological mechanisms driving these disparities in HNSCC remain poorly understood. While studies in other cancer types have leveraged ancestry-informed genomic analyses to uncover population-specific mechanisms of tumor biology, similar approaches in HNSCC remain limited by smaller cohort sizes and reduced diversity. Expanding ancestry-stratified analyses in HNSCC could reveal distinct immune or regulatory programs that drive tumor aggressiveness across ancestry groups. Additionally, integrating multi-omics data sets, such as RNA-seq, ATAC-seq, and methylation profiles, across ancestries would enable a deeper understanding of ancestry-associated gene regulation and may identify novel therapeutic vulnerabilities in HNSCC.