Introduction: Ethnic enclaves are culturally or ethnically distinct neighborhoods with high concentrations of individuals with the same ethnic origin, additionally characterized by linguistic isolation, a large share of recent immigrants, and/or ethnic specific businesses and resources. 1 , 2 Asian American individuals often reside in ethnic enclaves, which have been hypothesized to affect health outcomes. 3 – 7 Enclaves may negatively impact health and health behaviors through attributes of disadvantaged neighborhoods (e.g., low access to healthcare, poor street conditions, high traffic density, low safety). Conversely, there are multiple pathways 3 – 7 through which residing in an ethnic enclave could promote health, including: culturally and linguistically relevant information and resources which could facilitate access to healthcare; social support and cultural norms that may support health promoting behaviors (e.g., physical activity such as tai chi or yoga, ethnic foods prepared in traditional ways); reduced exposure to discrimination which could limit the use of unhealthy coping behaviors (e.g., smoking and drinking) and reduce levels of stress; and access to economic opportunities through small businesses or networks. For this study, we chose five states (CA, FL, NJ, NY, TX) with large and/or rapidly growing populations of Asian Americans; as of 2010 these states collectively accounted for 57% of the Asian American population in the US. In an ecologic study, we showed Asian American enclave neighborhoods in these five states to be more metropolitan, have less poverty, fewer uninsured people, and higher primary care accessibility than non-enclave neighborhoods. 8 Cancer is the leading cause of death in Asian American individuals. 9 , 10 Asian American enclaves and neighborhoods with high Asian ethnic density have been associated with cancer incidence, mortality, and screening among Asian American adults, with residence in enclaves shown to be both beneficial and detrimental, depending on the cancer site, outcome, or the study. 11 – 13 For example, for Asian American individuals, residing in an ethnic enclave was associated with higher incidence rates of cervical cancer and lower incidence rates of colorectal cancer; with higher risk of breast cancer in high socioeconomic status (SES) enclaves. 13 Mixed findings could be due to differing risk factors for different cancer sites, or varying operationalization of enclave measures and geographic scales used, or differences in the sociodemographic composition or social, physical, and built environment characteristics of enclaves across different geographic regions of the United States (US). Moreover, many existing studies about ethnic enclaves are focused on only one state. 13 In addition, neighborhood socioeconomic status (nSES), and its correlation and joint effects with enclave status, plays a role in cancer incidence. 14 , 15 To address these limitations, we used the same measure of ethnic enclave across five states applied to three cancer sites with evidence-based screening guidelines from the United States Preventive Services Task Force, to explore whether residence in enclaves is associated with cancer incidence, separately and jointly with neighborhood poverty. Examining enclave associations with incidence rates across multiple cancer sites will inform which may be more or less related to enclave residence, contribute to generation of mechanistic hypotheses, and guide outreach and screening promotion in areas that need it most. Materials and Methods Study population We identified cancer cases using data from five population-based state cancer registries: California (CA), Florida (FL), New Jersey (NJ), New York (NY), and Texas (TX). These states comprised 57.4% of the Asian American population in the US in 2010. Cancer registries provided data on demographics (age at diagnosis, sex, race and ethnicity), tumor characteristics (site, sequence number, behavior, histology), and residential neighborhood at diagnosis (addresses were geocoded, assigned to 2010 census tracts [CT], and characterized by geocoding precision for census tract assignment). Data were obtained for Asian American adults (age ≥20 at diagnosis) with in situ or invasive breast cancer (females only), invasive cervical cancer (females only), or in situ or invasive colorectal cancer (males and females) from January 1, 2006, to December 31, 2017, with a known cancer sequence number. Cancer sites were identified using International Classification of Diseases for Oncology, 3 rd edition (ICD-O-3) site codes C50.0–50.9 (breast), C53.0–C53.9 (cervical), and C18.0–C18.9, C19.9, C20.9, and C26.0 (colorectal), excluding leukemias and lymphomas (histology codes 9050–9055, 9140, and 9590–9992). We did not include in situ cervical cancers as they are not consistently captured in registries. 16 We limited to cases diagnosed in 2006 or later and age 20 or older (instead of age 18 or older) to correspond to available population denominator data. For people with multiple tumors during the study period, all eligible tumors were requested. For each person, we excluded tumors of the same site (treating colon and rectum as one site) that were diagnosed within a year. This removed multiple tumors found on the same day (e.g., during a colonoscopy) or within a short time frame that could have represented the same index case. This approach ensured that the cancer count was enumerated consistently with the population data (where each person was counted once per year) and thus the age-adjusted incidence rates were not artificially inflated. After excluding tumors at the same site within one year of an index tumor; with a residential address at diagnosis that was incomplete, not geocodable, geocoded with poor precision, or erroneously geocoded to a county/CT combination that did not exist; or residing in a CT where the Asian American enclave index was missing ( Figure 1 ), the final analytic sample included n=74,485 breast tumors (in n=72,828 females), n=4,134 cervical tumors (n=4,119 females), n=17,158 colorectal tumors in females (n=16,958 females), and n=18,578 colorectal tumors in males (n=18,332 males). In the analysis, 2.2% of breast cancer patients, 0.4% of cervical cancer patients, and 1.3% of colorectal cancer patients had multiple primary cancers of the same site (over one year apart). We identified Asian American individuals as those with Asian American race or ethnic group (Asian Indian, Chinese, Filipino, Hmong, Japanese, Kampuchean [Cambodian], Korean, Laotian, Pakistani, Thai, Vietnamese, or Other Asian or Asian not otherwise specified [NOS]) in any race variable (up to five races recorded in CA, NJ, and NY, up to two races in TX, and one race in FL), regardless of Hispanic ethnicity (i.e., they could also be Hispanic). Race and ethnicity data were extracted from patient medical records and categorized according to registry classification systems. 17 In CA, NJ, NY, and TX, race and ethnicity was supplemented with the North American Association of Central Cancer Registries’ Asian Pacific Islander Identification Algorithm (NAPIIA). 18 This algorithm classifies Asian American/Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander (AANHPI) cases identified as Other or NOS into a specific ethnic group (e.g., Chinese) using factors such as race, Hispanic ethnicity, birthplace, and names. In this sample (excluding FL), 16.0% of cases were originally coded as Other Asian or Asian NOS; after applying the algorithm, 10.0% of the overall sample (62.4% of those originally classified as Other/NOS) were reclassified to a specific Asian ethnic group while 6.0% remained coded as Other/NOS. Neighborhood variables The Asian American enclave index was derived using the first component score from a principal component analysis of four CT-level variables pooled across all five states: proportion Asian American, proportion non-US born Asian American, proportion with limited English proficiency who speak Asian or Pacific Islander languages, and proportion linguistically isolated households where Asian or Pacific Islander languages are spoken (proportions defined using the total population or households of the CT, with age =5 for language proficiency). The index was calculated using data and population numbers from ACS 2008–2012 for 2010 CTs. 1.3% of census tracts across the 5 states were missing an enclave index value, primarily due to suppression of small population counts per the US Census Bureau standards. Details of the development of the Asian American enclave index and a description of the social and built environment characteristics within these enclaves have been described elsewhere. 8 , 19 The Asian American enclave index was categorized into quintiles, where the first quintile (Q1) represented census tracts with low Asian American enclave index score (i.e., least culturally or ethnically distinct neighborhoods) and the fifth quintile (Q5) represented high Asian American enclave index score (i.e., most culturally or ethnically distinct neighborhoods). We also dichotomized the index into ‘enclave’ and ‘non-enclave’ status. An enclave was defined as CTs in the fourth (Q4) and fifth (Q5) quintile with an Asian American population greater than 250 individuals; with eligible Q4 enclaves additionally required to be adjacent to an eligible Q5 enclave. An enclave trajectory measure was defined based on the enclave status of 2010 CTs compared to their enclave status in 2000, and was categorized as: never enclave (non-enclave in both 2000 and 2010), former enclave (enclave in 2000 but not in 2010), persistent enclave (enclave in both 2000 and 2010), and emergent enclave (enclave in 2010 but not in 2000). To determine the trajectory when CT boundaries changed, the boundaries for 2000 and 2010 were spatially intersected and the 2010 CT was assigned the category that described greater than 50% of its area. We defined high-poverty CTs as those with =20% of households with income less than the Federal Poverty Level using five-year ACS estimates from 2008–2012 and 2010 CTs. We used the Federal Poverty Level to ensure consistency across the five states. Population data Annual population estimates of the number of non-Hispanic AANHPI individuals in each CT by sex and five-year age groups to =85 were obtained from the National Cancer Institute via Woods Poole, 20 based on Census 2000 and 2010 data, using inter-censal estimates for 2006–2009 and post-censal estimates for 2010–2017. At the time of the current analysis, annual population-level denominator data by CT, sex, and age group were not available for Asian American separately from Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, nor for disaggregated Asian American ethnic groups. Statistical analysis We calculated annual age-adjusted incidence rates (AAIR) per 100,000, standardized to the 2000 US standard million population, and 95% confidence intervals (CI) using the Tiwari modification. 21 , 22 We calculated AAIRs using CT-, sex-, and age group- (5-year age groups from 20–24 to =85) specific cancer counts and population data for Asian American individuals, separately for two time-periods (2006–2011 and 2012–2017), for each cancer site, and for males and females for colorectal cancer. We used these two time periods (rather than looking at one 12-year period) to examine trends over time and to be more comparable with other published studies. AAIRs were presented across Asian American enclave index quintiles, enclave status, poverty ( 20% or =20% below the Federal Poverty Level), jointly by enclave status and poverty, and enclave trajectory. We conducted tests of linear trend across Asian American enclave index quintile AAIRs using weighted linear regression where the dependent variable was the AAIR, the independent variable was an ordinal variable set to the median value of the enclave index within each quintile (Q1: −1.35663, Q2: −0.63602, Q3: −0.11118, Q4: 0.52978, Q5: 1.38291), and the weight was the inverse of the variance of the AAIR. 23 We calculated incidence rate ratios (IRRs) by dividing the AAIR for each category by the AAIR for the reference category and computed 95% CIs. 24 As a sensitivity analysis, we calculated AAIRs and IRRs for invasive breast cancer (excluding in situ) because almost a quarter of the cases were diagnosed at the in situ stage, compared with only 4% of colorectal cancer cases. As another sensitivity analysis, we calculated state-stratified AAIRs and IRRs across enclave index quintiles, using the same enclave index and quintile cut-points as the primary analysis (i.e., pooled across the five states; not state-specific). As a secondary analysis of breast and colorectal cancer incidence rates, we calculated AAIRs and IRRs across enclave quintiles and enclave status stratified by age at diagnosis ( 50 vs. ≥50 years) to determine whether associations differed by screening-eligible versus typically unscreened age groups; and compared IRRs and CIs for non-enclaves between age 50 and ≥50 years. Analyses were performed in SAS 9.4 (RRID: SCR_008567) and statistical significance was p 0.05. Data availability The ethnic enclave measures for recent years are available to the public on the UCSF Health Atlas website (see https://healthatlas.ucsf.edu/ ). The registry data are not publicly available due to data confidentiality concerns and can be requested via state cancer registries. Results Table 1 shows the distribution of tumors among Asian American adults included in the analysis for each cancer site, sex, and year group. The majority of tumors were diagnosed in CA (59–69%), with 16–22% in NY, and 5% in FL. For breast cancer, 23–24% of tumors were in situ and 4% were diagnosed at distant stage; for cervical, 12–14% were diagnosed at distant stage; and for CRC, 4% were in situ and 17–19% were diagnosed at distant stage. For all sites, 75% or more of tumors were in people who lived in Asian American enclaves at the time of diagnosis. More than a quarter (26–27%) of cervical cancer tumors were in people who lived in high-poverty neighborhoods, compared to 15–16% of breast, and 21–22% of CRC. Supplementary Table S1 shows the distribution of these factors by Asian American enclave index quintiles. Across cancer sites and time-periods, 71–78% of tumors diagnosed in CA were in people who resided in the highest quintile of Asian American enclave index, 36–70% in NJ, NY, and TX, and 5–8% in FL ( Supplementary Table S1 ). Supplementary Table S2 shows the distribution of tumors by Asian American ethnic group (among the four states with available data). In all, 30–32% of CRC tumors and 23–27% of breast and cervical tumors were diagnosed in Chinese American individuals. Within Asian American ethnic groups, the percent of cancer cases residing in Asian American enclaves varied from 86–90% of Chinese American cases to 63–72% of Asian Indian/Pakistani American cases ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Breast cancer Breast cancer incidence rates were lower among Asian American adults residing in neighborhoods which were less culturally distinct compared to those residing in neighborhoods which were more culturally distinct, with a gradient observed across quintiles (AAIR p-trend=0.01 in 2006–2011 and p-trend=0.06 in 2012–2017, although the latter did not reach statistical significance; Table 2 ). Incidence rates were lower in non-enclaves compared to enclaves in both time-periods (for example, IRR 0.88, 95% CI 0.86–0.90 in 2012–2017). Incidence rates were also lower in neighborhoods with high poverty compared to low poverty in both time-periods (for example, IRR 0.84, 95% CI 0.81–0.86 for high-poverty compared to low-poverty neighborhoods in 2012–2017). Looking at the joint association of Asian American enclave status and poverty, the associations of enclave (lower rates in non-enclaves) and poverty (lower rates in high-poverty) can be seen in both time-periods ( Figure 2 showing AAIRs per 100,000), although the enclave association differed by poverty level and time-period. In 2012–2017, breast cancer incidence rates were lowest in high-poverty non-enclaves (IRR 0.70, 95% CI 0.67–0.74) and highest in low-poverty Asian American enclaves (reference group). Former enclaves had incidence rates which were similar to persistent enclaves; whereas for emergent enclaves the rate was somewhat lower (IRR=0.95, 95% CI 0.92–0.98 in 2012–2017), although not as low as for neighborhoods that were never enclaves (IRR=0.85, 95% CI 0.83–0.87 in 2012–2017). Limiting to invasive breast cancer (excluding in situ), patterns were similar but results slightly attenuated ( Supplementary Table S3 ). Cervical cancer Cervical cancer incidence rates were not associated with Asian American enclave index quintiles ( Table 2 ). However, incidence rates were lower in non-enclaves in the earlier time period (IRR: 0.89, 95% CI 0.79–0.99 in 2006–2011). Incidence rates were higher with high poverty in both time-periods (for example, IRR 1.68, 95% CI 1.52–1.85 in high-poverty neighborhoods compared to low-poverty in 2012–2017). Among estimates of joint associations, high poverty was associated with higher cervical cancer incidence regardless of enclave status ( Figure 2 ). In the early time-period only, emergent and never enclaves, compared to persistent enclaves, had slightly lower incidence rates. Colorectal cancer in females Colorectal cancer incidence rates in females were generally lower in less culturally distinct neighborhoods than in more culturally distinct neighborhoods, with a gradient observed across quintiles in the early time-period (AAIR p-trend=0.01 in 2006–2011; AAIR p-trend=0.05 in 2012–2017, although the latter did not reach statistical significance; Table 2 ). Incidence rates were lower in non-enclaves compared to enclaves in both time-periods (for example, IRR 0.88, 95% CI 0.84–0.93 in 2012–2017). Incidence rates were higher with high poverty in the later time-period only. For joint associations, incidence rates were lower in non-enclaves compared to enclaves in both poverty levels; however, rates were only higher in high-poverty compared to low-poverty neighborhoods in enclaves in the later time-period ( Figure 2 ). In 2012–2017, the IRRs were generally similar in all groups except higher in high-poverty Asian American enclaves (IRR 1.23, 95% CI 1.16–1.31) compared to low-poverty enclaves. In the early time-period, both former and emergent enclaves had lower incidence rates than persistent enclaves; whereas in the later time period, only emergent enclaves had lower rates. Colorectal cancer in males Colorectal cancer incidence rates in males were lower in less culturally distinct neighborhoods compared to more culturally distinct neighborhoods, with a gradient observed across quintiles in both time-periods (AAIR p-trend=0.004 in 2006–2011 and p-trend=0.001 in 2011–2017; Table 2 ). Incidence rates were lower in non-enclaves compared to enclaves in both time-periods (for example, IRR 0.80, 95% CI 0.76–0.84 in 2012–2017). Incidence rates were higher with high poverty in both time-periods. Examining joint associations, incidence rates were lower in non-enclaves compared to enclaves in both poverty levels; however, rates were higher in high-poverty compared to low-poverty neighborhoods only in enclaves especially in 2012–2017 ( Figure 2 ). In 2012–2017, the IRRs were lowest in low-poverty non-enclaves (AAIR 0.82, 95% CI 0.77–0.86) and highest in high-poverty Asian American enclaves (IRR 1.24, 95% CI 1.17–1.31) compared to low-poverty enclaves. In the early time-period, both former and emergent enclaves had similar incidence rates to persistent enclaves; whereas in the later time period, emergent enclaves had lower rates. State-stratified age-adjusted incidence rates by Asian American enclave index quintiles are presented in Supplementary Table S4 . For breast cancer, patterns were similar to the overall five-state results (with lower AAIRs in low enclave) for CA, NY, and TX (later time-period); there was no association with enclave index quintiles in NJ; and results were in the opposite direction (with higher AAIRs in low enclave) in FL, particularly in the early time-period. For cervical cancer, patterns were similar to the overall results (no association with enclave index quintiles) or numbers were too small to assess associations. For colorectal cancer in females, patterns were similar to the overall results (with lower AAIRs in low enclave) only for CA and NY in the early time-period; otherwise, results were not statistically significant and showed an inconsistent pattern for other states and time-periods. For colorectal cancer in males, patterns were similar to the overall results (with lower AAIRs in low enclave) for CA, FL (early time-period), NY (later time-period), and TX (later time-period); there was no association with enclave index quintiles in NJ. Thus, in general, the overall results were driven by CA, NY, and TX. Examining IRRs stratified by age ( 50 vs. =50 years) for enclave quintiles and enclave status for breast and colorectal cancer, there was no difference by age (overlapping CIs for the two age groups within each category and the estimate for the =50 age group fell within the CI for the 50 age group for each category; Supplementary Table S5 ). Discussion We compared annual age-adjusted incidence rates of three cancers amenable to screening in Asian American adults by neighborhood Asian American enclave index quintiles, enclave status, and neighborhood poverty, across five states comprising 57.4% of the US Asian American population. While breast and colorectal cancer incidence rates were higher in Asian American enclaves, no association was found for cervical cancer. For breast cancer, both enclave and low-poverty neighborhoods were associated with higher incidence rates, with the highest incidence rates seen in low-poverty enclaves. For colorectal cancer, high-poverty enclave neighborhoods had the highest incidence rates. We found joint associations with residence in enclaves and neighborhood poverty suggesting synergistic impact but this varied across cancer site and time-period. The relevance of residence in ethnic enclaves and interaction with neighborhood-level SES in cancer incidence among Asian American populations is consistent with existing, albeit limited, research pointing to the importance of these neighborhood-level attributes in cancer risk. For this study, stratifying enclave status by low/high poverty neighborhoods showed a synergistic association for breast cancer in both time-periods and colorectal cancer in 2012–2017 when comparing estimates and confidence intervals for non-enclaves across poverty levels ( Supplemental Table S6 ). As summarized in a review paper, higher incidence of breast and cervical cancer was found in Asian American enclave census tracts in CA, but the inverse was observed in colorectal cancer. 13 For breast cancer, 25 the highest risk was in high-SES enclaves and for cervical cancer, 26 the highest incidence was in low-SES enclaves. A recent study in AANHPI females residing in CA found lower incidence of breast cancer in high enclave and higher incidence in high nSES; with the highest incidence in low-enclave high-nSES neighborhoods. 14 Inconsistent findings between studies are likely due to different methods used, both in how the population denominator data were estimated and how the enclave index measure was defined, especially given the that the majority of cases resided in the more culturally distinct areas (i.e., higher enclave index quintiles). The observed associations between enclave residence and cancer incidence may reflect the influence of—or correlation with—several unmeasured factors, such as characteristics of the residents (individual-level SES, immigration status, insurance status, cancer screening behaviors) or attributes of the neighborhoods themselves. Though we could not directly assess these individual-level factors as they are not available in registry data, prior literature suggests they may play a role. Neighborhood features of enclaves such as ethnic-specific resources, co-ethnic social support and collective efficacy, and/or other environmental factors influence exposures and behaviors. In a previous ecologic analyses of these same five states, neighborhoods classified as enclaves by our measure of Asian American enclave status were characterized by a lower percentage of uninsured individuals and higher primary care accessibility, which could lead to more cancers being diagnosed through cancer screening. 8 Greater access to healthcare may contribute to the higher CRC incidence rates observed in more culturally distinct neighborhoods. The same study demonstrated that enclaves were more likely to be metropolitan compared to non-enclaves, and also have lower crime and less poverty. Higher breast cancer incidence within more culturally distinct neighborhoods may be shaped by reproductive patterns (lower parity, later age at first birth) prevalent in metropolitan, higher-SES places, potentially interacting with screening access and acculturation-related lifestyle changes. In addition, non-US born status has been shown to be associated with higher breast cancer risk in Asian American women 27 , 28 , which could contribute to higher breast cancer incidence within enclaves. Further research is needed to tease apart and identify the specific factors underlying these differential cancer risks. Additional multi-state studies using the same methods across states could provide more clarity. We observed higher incidence of breast cancer in low-poverty neighborhoods and higher incidence of cervical cancer in high-poverty neighborhoods. These results are consistent with prior studies which show higher incidence of breast cancer among those with high individual and neighborhood SES, due to different distributions of risk factors by SES 29 – 33 and higher incidence of cervical cancer in those with low SES, due to different uptake of screening for cervical cancer, different rates of follow-up for abnormal testing, as well as differences in HPV infection rates and HPV prevalence by SES 34 , 35 . While there is evidence of lower CRC mortality with higher SES in non-Hispanic White patients, 36 the association between CRC incidence and SES is less clear. 37 , 38 We observed higher incidence of CRC in high-poverty neighborhoods in both time-periods for males and in the later time-period only for females. The emergence of a SES disparity is likely influenced by the unequal adoption of CRC screening during this time period. 39 We found no meaningful differences in incidence rates of breast and colorectal cancer when stratified by age ( 50 vs. =50 years); although numbers were small in the 50 age group. As rates were not higher in the screening-eligible age group, this suggests incidence was not due to healthcare access or screening but other factors. Similar to other studies, 40 , 41 we saw higher CRC incidence rates in males than females; this is suggested comparing AAIRs and CIs across categories for the different measures by sex. When comparing IRRs, however, patterns are generally similar by sex across the enclave measures. Limitations While strengths of this analysis include using population-based cancer registry data from five states representing 57.4% of Asian American individuals in the US and a composite measure of Asian American enclave index based on CT-level data, there are several limitations. Results may be specific to the Asian American population in the states included and may not be generalizable to this population in the rest of the US. We were underpowered to examine AAIRS and IRRs stratified by age, as numbers were small in the 50 age group. We used residential address at time of diagnosis; however, cases could have lived elsewhere during the critical exposure and screening windows for cancer. To measure ethnic enclave and poverty we used ACS data from 2008–2012, which was from the earlier years included in our study and therefore may not have reflected the enclave status of neighborhoods for cases diagnosed in later years. However, statewide comparisons have shown that these measures were relatively stable over time, with 88–92% of census tract not changing their enclave status designation when using ACS data from 2015–2019 (compared to 2008–2012). Cancer cases were Asian American individuals (regardless of Hispanic ethnicity) as the Asian American enclave index was defined predominantly based on neighborhood characteristics specific to Asian American populations. However, the Woods Poole population estimates were enumerated for non-Hispanic Asian American/Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander individuals, as data for the non-Hispanic Asian American population were not available at the time of this analysis. This slight mismatch between the numerator and denominator is a limitation, but we believe the extent of under-estimation of rates is small given that, in these five states, Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander individuals comprise approximately 2.2% of the total AANHPI population. Moreover, in a sensitivity analysis of the enclave index quintile analysis when we recalculated AAIRs to include non-Hispanic Asian American/Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander adult cases, results were similar. For example, for breast cancer in 2012–2017, IRR 0.73, 95% CI 0.68–0.79 in Q1 compared to Q5; AAIR p-trend=0.08 (compared to IRR 0.71, 95% CI 0.65–0.76 in Q1 compared to Q5; AAIR p-trend=0.06 in the primary analysis). We were unable to show AAIRs disaggregated into specific Asian American ethnic groups, because although we had this data for the cases (excepting Florida), the corresponding disaggregated Asian American population data was not available. These limitations highlight the need for population denominator data that disaggregates Asian American, Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islander populations overall, and ideally by specific ethnic groups, by CT, sex, and 5-year age intervals—data that are not currently available but necessary for population-based studies of cancer incidence relevant to these diverse populations. Additionally, as higher incidence could reflect greater detection rather than higher risk, having data on insurance status and screening would better inform our understanding of what may be contributing to these cancer incidence rates as well as inform potential opportunities for interventions. Conclusion Asian American enclave residence was associated with higher incidence rates of breast and colorectal cancers, with no association for cervical cancer. In breast cancer, the highest incidence rate was in low-poverty enclaves, whereas for colorectal cancer, the highest incidence rate was in high-poverty enclaves. Going forward, understanding incidence rates for other cancers will be important, especially those where Asian American individuals have a higher burden (e.g., lung, liver, and gastric cancers). Further disaggregated research is needed to continue to disentangle both positive and negative health effects of residing in Asian American enclaves for Asian ethnic groups, and culturally-informed interventions are warranted to increase screening and reduce cancer incidence in areas experiencing disproportionate burden. Supplementary Material 1 2 3 4 5 6