Key Points Asian, Asian Pacific Islander, and Hispanic adult patients with non-small cell lung cancer are significantly underrepresented in clinical trials, and current data on enrollment demographics obscure the full extent of these disparities. Socioeconomic, structural, and cultural barriers uniquely affect these patient populations that lead to long-term effects on informed clinical decision-making. Our editorial highlights strategies on disaggregated race and ethnicity data, community engagement options, and enrollment measures for enrollment sites to achieve equitable minority patient recruitment. Introduction Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for nearly 83–87% of lung cancers worldwide and remains the leading cause of cancer-related mortality among adult patients [ 1 , 2 ]. Asian, Asian Pacific Islander (API), and Hispanic patient populations account for a large proportion of adult patients with NSCLC. Studies have identified increasing rates of NSCLC of approximately 1–2% per year amongst Asian and API patients, particularly evident in subgroups of women and nonsmokers [ 3 , 4 ]. The treatment landscape of NSCLC, including the emergence of bispecific antibodies, novel ADCs, and targeted therapies, has made rapid advancements for subsets of patients with NSCLC [ 5 ]. Despite these advances and increasing diversity in the USA among patients with NSCLC, enrollment rates of Asian, API, and Hispanic patients into clinical trials remain disproportionately low [ 6 ]. The underrepresentation of minority populations in clinical trials persists in comparison with real-world incidence rates despite evidence highlighting the higher prevalence of driver mutations such as EGFR, ALK, and ROS1 in Asian populations [ 7 , 8 ]. These important driver mutations are the target of several practice-changing targeted therapies and an example of the biologic diversity that may be masked. We aim to highlight the magnitude of discrepancies in trial enrollment, identify key barriers to equity in clinical trial enrollment, and explore strategies to improve diversity to ensure more generalized clinical trial outcomes for patients with NSCLC in the USA. We focused on Asian, API, and Hispanic patient populations who face enrollment underrepresentation that is further obscured by data aggregation techniques in clinical trial reporting. Enrollment Data and Disparities Despite efforts to increase rates of minority patient participation in US lung cancer clinical trials, Hispanic patients with NSCLC represent only 3.4% of trial participants across lung cancer clinical trials (Fig. 1 ) [ 6 ]. Studies demonstrate that Hispanic patients are less likely than white patients to undergo indicated lung cancer screening on the basis of recommendations by the US Preventive Services Task Force [ 9 ]. Upon lung cancer diagnosis, there is also a lower likelihood that Hispanic patients will undergo tissue or liquid-based next generation sequencing (NGS) testing compared with other patient populations. This not only hinders the identification of key molecular alterations (such as EGFR, ALK, ROS1, and MET), but also presents a barrier to shared decision-making between providers and patients regarding molecularly driven standard of care versus novel cancer therapeutics through clinical trial enrollment [ 10 ]. Kanuparthy et al. identified lung cancer trials funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) that did not recruit or enroll any Hispanic patients [ 11 ]. This is not an uncommon occurrence in Hispanic patient populations despite higher rates of active tobacco use, exposure to secondhand smoke, and occupational exposures (particularly agricultural work and pesticide use), all of which are risk factors for both NSCLC and SCLC [ 12 ]. Fig. 1 Differences in percentages of actual trial enrollment versus expected trial enrollment among Asian Americans, Asian Pacific Islanders and Hispanic patients with NSCLC A review of Asian and API patient enrollment data reveals key issues due to frequent aggregation of multiple Asian subpopulations (such as East Asian, South Asian, and Pacific Islander) into one collective group for the purposes of sharing clinical trial enrollment data. Wheeler et al. reported that Asian and API patients represent approximately 10.4% of patients with NSCLC in clinical trials (Fig. 1 ) [ 6 ]. At first glance, this percentage can appear to represent the approximate incidence of NSCLC in Asian and API patients in the USA. However, when delving into the data and restricting by US-based Asian subpopulations, API patients (namely Non-Hawaiian Pacific Islander and Native Hawaiian patients) were found to be markedly underrepresented with enrollment rates falling to 0.2–1% in US-based oncology trials (Fig. 1 ) [ 13 ]. The apparent enrollment rate of Asian patients in US oncology may be partially inflated by the inclusion of participants recruited at international trial sites in East Asia [ 14 ]. The overrepresentation of international Asian populations in clinical oncology trials further impacts the generalizability of outcomes to US-based patients, owing to the distinct risk factors and cancer epidemiology of international Asian populations. This may pose a risk for clinicians seeking to implement novel-based therapies for a completely different population of patients. Barriers to Equitable Enrollment There are clear structural barriers that lead to nonequitable enrollment of Hispanic, Asian, and Pacific Islander patients in the USA. Limited English proficiency is frequently cited as a major barrier to enrolling Hispanic and Asian patient populations, and translating consent forms and informational materials can increase the cost burden, which presents another impediment [ 15 ]. Furthermore, trial sites may not always have principal/sub-investigators and clinical trial coordinators who share similar cultural beliefs or are able to communicate with patients in their preferred native language [ 16 ]. From a practical standpoint, entry criteria for clinical trials should be more inclusive. For example, Cockroft–Gault [ 17 ] should not be the sole evaluation method for creatinine clearance. One large cohort study of patients with advanced NSCLC demonstrated that Asian patients had greater odds of being excluded from trial eligibility owing to liver function test thresholds, including ALP (odds ratio 1.71), and creatinine clearance criteria (odds ratio 1.63) compared with white patients [ 18 ]. It is clear that different thresholds for entry may be considered. Socioeconomic disparities, in particular access to reliable transportation and stable employment with flexible work schedules, can lead to additional barriers, as there are more frequent clinic follow-up appointments, lab-draws, and imaging required of patients enrolled in a clinical trial [ 15 ]. Although support for transportation or travel vouchers can often be provided by the study sponsor, some patients may not be aware of or feel comfortable asking about assistance programs. Hispanic, Asian, and API patients may also develop mistrust in the healthcare system owing to absence of effective communication and consequently be less inclined to participate in clinical trials. Cultural barriers have led to underrepresentation of Hispanic, Asian, and API patients with NSCLC and have significant impact on clinical outcomes [ 19 ]. Hong et al. found that US-based Asian and non-native Hawaiian Pacific Islander female patients were frequently diagnosed with NSCLC with more advanced disease at time of presentation compared with white patients [ 20 ]. Asian patients have higher rates of key oncogenic driver mutations, notably EGFR alterations, compared with white patients [ 19 ]. Higher rates of ROS1 and ALK driver mutations are also reported among Asian and Hispanic patients compared with white patients [ 21 ], albeit not as common as EGFR mutations, leading to potential limitations with accrual in their respective clinical trials. Nouvini et al. identified the use of patient navigation interventions and educational video interventions leading to a statistically significant increase in accrual of minority patients in US-based cancer trials [ 22 ]. Yet, the recruitment and enrollment of Hispanic patients in NSCLC clinical trials remained disproportionately low despite community-based interventions [ 11 ]. Increased recruitment of Asian patients enrolled from international trial sites demonstrates a numeric increase; however, a nuanced analysis reveals issues with aggregation and significant underrepresentation of US-based Asian subpopulations. There is a clear ethical dilemma in the inequitable representation of Asian, API, and Hispanic patients that extends beyond underrepresentation. Given the increased mortality associated with advanced stage NSCLC, some patients can derive a clinically meaningful benefit with early access to novel cancer therapeutics in a clinical trial that otherwise might take years before approval and release to the general public. Strategies and Overall Recommendations We propose the following recommendations over the next decade to address the paucity of enrollment of Asian, Pacific Islander, and Hispanic patients in NSCLC to ensure equity and improved clinical outcomes for underrepresented patient populations. Study sponsors should be required to provide more accurate population-based statistics and disaggregate Asian and Pacific Islander categories into subpopulations, including South Asian, East Asian, and Pacific Islander categories in accordance with the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) diversity action plans. Additionally, the recruitment of international Asian populations versus US-based Asian populations must be clearly recognized as there are distinct environmental factors for East Asian patients living in East Asia versus the USA. Institutions that host clinical trial sites must also invest in evidence-based community engagement strategies to improve recruitment, including cultural competency training for providers and patient navigators along with use of translated consent and translated educational materials/videos. Finally, study sponsors must be held accountable for equitable recruitment by creating new conditions for minority patient recruitment that enable sufficient support to investigators and sites to enroll minority patient populations, for NSCLC and all oncology clinical trials. Clinical investigators may benefit from the support of media-based recruitment strategies to partner with US-based Spanish/Asian media and minority patient advocacy groups to build increased trust with minority NSCLC populations who are especially vulnerable. Conclusions We must recognize that, in the end, the underenrollment of Asian, Asian Pacific Islander, and Hispanic patients in NSCLC trials is “our loss” as it is a missed opportunity with profound clinical impact. Such efforts will require a multidisciplinary strategy moving forward, and we must start now.