Introduction The detrimental impact of place-based poverty on health outcomes ( 1 , 2 ), including cancer ( 3 – 5 ), is well known. For over a century, public health leaders have documented the influence of poverty on health, linking the characteristics of impoverished areas (e.g., poor air/water quality, lack of education and employment opportunities, lack of access to healthy food) with poor health outcomes for individuals and groups ( 6 , 7 ). The NCI recognizes poverty as a key driver of cancer disparities and mortality ( 8 , 9 ). In particular, there is a growing understanding of the influence of long-term place-based poverty, termed persistent poverty , on cancer outcomes ( 3 ). Persistent poverty is an area-level condition wherein a high proportion of the population has lived in poverty for a protracted period of time ( 4 ). It is measured as an area where at least 20% of the population has lived below the federal poverty level for 30 years or more ( 10 ). Compared with intermittent or short-term high poverty, persistent poverty represents an accumulation of ill health effects for communities and individuals engendered by prolonged economic and resource deprivation ( 8 ). Since 2009, the US government has used persistent poverty designations to target resources toward underserved communities ( 11 ). This review used the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) cancer disparities model ( 12 ) to examine the relationship between persistent poverty and outcomes along the cancer continuum, including development, risk reduction, early detection, treatment, survivorship, and mortality. The AACR cancer disparities model draws on social-ecological models of health ( 13 , 14 ) and the social determinants of health (SDH) framework ( 1 , 2 ) to demonstrate how systemic inequities, including poverty, racism, and segregation, shape drivers of health (e.g., psychosocial, socioeconomic, and clinical factors), which results in disparities in outcomes along the cancer continuum for marginalized groups. Persistent poverty is the consequence of intersecting systemic inequities, including racial and economic segregation, resource deprivation, localized disinvestment, and geographic isolation ( 4 , 11 ). Persistent poverty areas are characterized by limited access to healthcare facilities, safe housing, education, employment, healthy food, and public services ( 11 ). These areas are overwhelmingly rural and home to large populations of racial and ethnic minorities, particularly Black/African American residents. Though concentrated in the rural South, areas of persistent poverty exist throughout the rural and urban United States. Persistent poverty counties make up 11.2% of all US counties and 15.2% of all rural counties ( 15 ). Informed by the AACR cancer disparities model ( 12 ), we sought to explore disparities in cancer outcomes by persistent poverty. It is well established that people living in persistent poverty areas face greater exposure to cancer risk factors, including environmental toxins, high stress, healthy food deserts, and lack of healthcare access ( 8 ). Less is known, however, about outcomes across the entire cancer continuum, which encompasses all stages of cancer care, including development, risk reduction, early detection, treatment, survivorship, and mortality ( 12 ), and how these outcomes compare with areas without persistent poverty. The goal of this scoping review was to characterize the rapidly growing body of literature on the relationship between persistent poverty and outcomes across the cancer continuum while identifying gaps and opportunities for future research. This review was guided by two research questions: 1. What is known about the cancer burden across the cancer continuum in persistent poverty areas in the United States? 2. What gaps exist in the literature about the cancer burden across the cancer continuum in persistent poverty areas in the United States? Materials and Methods We conducted a scoping review in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews ( 16 ). Scoping reviews are appropriate when researchers are mapping the extent and nature of the literature and determining possible gaps ( 16 , 17 ). Scoping reviews do not involve human subjects and thus do not require ethics approval or Institutional Review Board review. The goal was to identify articles that used the concept of persistent poverty to frame the geographic area or study population and assessed the impact of exposure to persistent poverty on a cancer-related outcome, including development, risk reduction, early detection, treatment, survivorship, and mortality. Literature search The search strategy aimed to identify articles that examined the relationship between persistent poverty and cancer-related outcomes. A research librarian (K. Strahan) formulated and conducted the searches in the following databases in February 2024: CINAHL, Embase, PubMed MEDLINE, and Web of Science. Search terms were tailored for each database using controlled vocabulary where applicable (i.e., Medical Subject Headings) and keywords related to persistent poverty and cancer terminology (see Supplementary Methods S1 for the search strategy for each database). A hand search was performed in August 2024 that added five articles to the full-text review and extraction process. The full search strategy for each database can be found in Supplementary Methods S1. The multidatabase search yielded 4,857 results that the medical librarian uploaded into Covidence, a review management system. These results are inclusive of an updated search that was conducted in July 2025 that yielded an additional 70 results. Covidence identified 1,940 duplicates, and there were 19 duplicates identified by hand. A total of 2,898 abstracts were screened to determine eligibility. Each citation was reviewed independently by two study team members against predefined inclusion and exclusion criteria ( Fig. 1 ). Figure 1. Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses flowchart: persistent poverty and cancer. A visual summary of the screening process for this scoping review generated using Covidence. Inclusion and exclusion Peer-reviewed journal articles published in English between January 1, 2009 (the first year the persistent poverty designation was used in policy implementation), and July 9, 2025, were included if they were conducted in the United States, included empirical data, and described a cancer-related outcome at any stage along the cancer continuum in a persistent poverty area or compared a cancer-related outcome in persistent poverty area(s) with other places. We excluded studies that were dissertations, preprints, reviews, reports, commentaries, or abstracts. Article screening, selection, and data extraction Blinded coauthors (E. Hallgren, P. DelNero, M. Schootman, B.C. Amick, K. Owsley, J.L. Allen) used Covidence review software to independently check the titles and abstracts based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Two authors independently reviewed and voted to include or exclude each abstract, with conflicts resolved by a third author. This was followed by a full-text review of 512 selected articles. Each full-text publication was independently reviewed by two reviewers; conflicts were resolved by a third team member. Thirty-five articles were retained for data extraction. The study team collaboratively developed a standardized data extraction template in Covidence. Each article’s data were extracted by one team member and checked by a separate team member. The information recorded included study aims, study population, definition of persistent poverty, geographic measurement of persistent poverty (e.g., county/census tract), geographic study setting, cancer site(s) studied, outcome(s) assessed along the cancer continuum, and main findings related to persistent poverty. We also recorded each article’s study design, data source(s), inclusion of a community advisory board or community-engaged research, and funding. Because this was a scoping review, we did not assess the quality of evidence of the included articles ( 16 ). Results Characteristics of included articles Table 1 provides an overview of the included articles. Articles were published between 2011 and 2025, with the vast majority (94%) published between 2020 and 2025 ( Fig. 2 ). Overall, studies aimed to assess the association between persistent poverty exposure and one or more cancer-related outcomes, with some also examining the influence of factors including rurality, race or ethnicity, and residential segregation. Study populations varied from samples of patients diagnosed with a range of cancers, patients diagnosed with a single cancer type, and samples of adults in particular geographic locations. Sample sizes varied from less than 1,000 patients in studies using primary data to analyses of the entire US population using population-based registries. Table 1. Table of evidence for studies selected for inclusion. Citation Study aims Study population Definition of persistent poverty Geographic study setting Persistent poverty measurement level Cancer site(s) Outcome(s) assessed across the cancer continuum Main findings related to persistent poverty Andrilla and colleagues ( 65 ) Examine differences in the rate of advanced-stage colorectal cancer diagnosis between rural and urban patients. N = 132,127 patients with colorectal cancer 20% or more of county residents being poor as defined by the 1980–2000 decennial censuses and the American Community Survey 5-year estimates for 2007–2011 United States County Colorectal Development (stage at diagnosis) Patients with colorectal cancer living in remote, small rural counties were more likely to present with advanced-stage colorectal cancer compared with patients living in other counties. No significant association between persistent poverty and the rate of advanced-stage colorectal cancer diagnosis was found. Baldwin and colleagues ( 66 ) Compare the receipt of different early prostate cancer treatments among rural vs. urban patients. N = 51,982 patients with prostate cancer 20% or more of county residents being poor, as measured by the 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 decennial censuses United States County Prostate Treatment Patients with rural prostate cancer living in persistent poverty areas had among the lowest rates of definitive treatment. Bennett and colleagues ( 30 ) Examine cancer screening rates (breast, colorectal, and cervical) across persistent poverty rural counties, other rural counties, and urban counties, with a focus on racial/ethnic minority populations. N = 309,937 unweighted (196,344,347 weighted) adults 20% or more of a county population below the poverty level in 1960, 1970, 1980, and 1990 United States County Breast, colorectal, cervical Early detection Overall, rural residents, especially residents of persistent poverty rural areas, were less likely to receive cancer screenings. For all three cancers, a higher proportion of eligible patients in persistent poverty rural counties did not report receiving a recommended screening compared with residents of other rural counties and urban counties. Bernacchi and colleagues ( 18 ) Compare lung cancer risk, incidence, and mortality across four county types, cross-classified by rurality and persistent poverty. All 3,143 US counties 20% or more of the population living below the poverty line based on the 1980, 1990, and 2000 census measures and the 2007–2011 American Community Survey United States County Lung/bronchus Risk reduction, development (incidence), mortality Counties that were classified as both rural and in persistent poverty had the highest rates of smoking, lung cancer incidence, and lung cancer mortality. Bhattacharya and colleagues ( 21 ) Demonstrate the availability of SEER’s census tract dataset and provide incidence, stage at diagnosis, and survival data for eight cancer sites. Cancer cases diagnosed from SEER 22 registries 20% or more of the census tract population living below the federal poverty level based on the 1990 and 2000 decennial censuses and 2007–2011 and 2015–2019 American Community Survey 5-year estimates United States Census Tract Breast, cervical, colorectal, liver, lung/bronchus, oropharyngeal, prostate, stomach Development (incidence and stage at diagnosis), mortality Persistent poverty census tracts had higher incidence rates (all cancer sites except breast and prostate cancer), higher percentages of late-stage diagnoses, and lower 5-year survival rates compared with nonpersistent areas. Burch and colleagues ( 28 ) Identify predictors of mammography use and breast cancer mortality. N = 1,678,416 women Time points not specified North Carolina County Breast Early detection, mortality Living in a persistent poverty county (PPC) was associated with decreased mammography screening rates. Persistent poverty was not significantly associated with breast cancer mortality. Chen and colleagues ( 32 ) Examine the relationship between persistent neighborhood poverty and breast cancer outcomes, including tumor characteristics, treatment, and mortality. N = 312,145 patients with breast cancer 20% or more of the census tract population living below the poverty level for at least 30 years based on the 1990 and 2000 decennial censuses and 2007–2011 and 2015–2019 American Community Survey 5-year estimates United States Census Tract Breast Treatment, mortality Residence in a persistent poverty census tract was associated with poorer tumor characteristics, a higher likelihood of mastectomy (vs. lumpectomy), a lower likelihood of breast reconstruction, and higher mortality. Chen and colleagues ( 67 ) Assess adherence to colorectal cancer screening among low-income uninsured and underinsured individuals in Texas by geographic factors, including rurality, persistent poverty, and racial residential segregation. N = 2,885 who received colonoscopy services as part of the C-STEP program 20% or more of county residents living in poverty from 1989 to 2015 to 2019 Texas County Colorectal Early detection Residents of counties with high racial residential segregation or persistent poverty were less likely to report receiving any type of colorectal cancer screening within the recommended time frame compared with those with lower racial residential segregation or not in persistent poverty. Coughlin and colleagues ( 38 ) Examine the influence of persistent poverty and rurality on colorectal cancer survival by race/ethnicity. N = 532,868 patients with colorectal cancer 20% or more of the population living below the poverty level for about 30 years, based on the 1990 and 2000 decennial censuses and the 2007–2011 and 2015–2019 American Community Survey 5-year estimates United States Census tract Colorectal Mortality Patients with colorectal cancer living in designated rural or persistent poverty areas had a slightly increased risk of colorectal cancer death compared with those not living in such areas. Regardless of racial/ethnic group, patients with colorectal cancer in rural areas with persistent poverty had a 1.2- to 1.6-fold increased risk of colorectal cancer death, with a higher estimate for American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) individuals. DelNero and colleagues ( 39 ) Assess the influence of persistent poverty and rurality on colorectal cancer survival among Arkansans. N = 7,993 patients with colorectal cancer Census tracts with poverty rates of 20% or higher for four consecutive measurement periods spanning 30 years (decennial census 1-year estimates for 1990 and 2000 and American Community Survey 5-year estimates for 2007–2011 and 2015–2019) Arkansas Census tract Colorectal Mortality Patients with colorectal cancer in persistent poverty census tracts had significantly higher all-cause mortality and non–colorectal cancer cause mortality rates than those in nonpersistent poverty census tracts. Subgroup analyses showed a significant association between persistent poverty and increased overall mortality in urban census tracts but not in rural tracts. Hallgren and colleagues ( 27 ) Gain firsthand knowledge from healthcare providers and clinic staff serving patients in persistent poverty areas to identify barriers, facilitators, and needs related to cancer prevention, control, and research. N = 17 primary care clinic providers and staff 20% or more of residents living in poverty for the past 30 years Arkansas County and census tract All sites Risk reduction Commonly reported barriers to cancer prevention and control for patients in persistent poverty areas included transportation issues, costs, limited providers/services, and patient discomfort with cancer. Facilitators included community health workers and community health events. Providers/staff identified patient education, improved workflows and communication, and integration of cancer navigators into the cancer care team as key needs. Hoppmann and colleagues ( 68 ) Compare all-cause mortality rates among children with cancer living in persistent child poverty areas compared with those not living in persistent child poverty environments. N = 2,089 children with cancer 20% or more of related children under 18 years old being poor, as measured by the 1980, 1990, and 2000 decennial censuses and the 2007–2011 American Community Survey 5-year estimates Alabama County All sites Mortality Children with cancer living in persistent child poverty areas had a 30% higher likelihood of dying within 5 years compared with children with cancer not exposed to persistent child poverty. Further distance to treatment was associated with higher mortality risk. Children exposed to both persistent child poverty and further distance to treatment had the highest likelihood of mortality. Karanth and colleagues ( 19 ) Examine oral and pharyngeal cancer incidence, 5-year survival, stage at diagnosis, and mortality rates by persistent poverty census tract vs. nonpersistent poverty census tract. N = 90,631 patients with oral cavity or pharyngeal cancers 20% or more of the population living below the poverty level for about 30 years based on the 1990 and 2000 decennial censuses and 2007–2011 and 2015–2019 American Community Survey 5-year estimates United States Census tract Oral, pharyngeal Development (incidence and stage at diagnosis), mortality Patients with oral and pharyngeal cancers living in persistent poverty areas had higher incidence rates, lower 5-year survival rates, greater prevalence of advanced-stage disease, and higher risk of mortality compared with patients living in areas not characterized by persistent poverty. Patients living in urban persistent poverty areas had higher rates of both all-cause and cancer-specific mortality compared with patients in rural persistent poverty areas. Kendzor and colleagues ( 26 ) Evaluate the feasibility and effectiveness of providing financial incentives (FI) for the completion of coaching calls, compared with coaching calls and nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) only, on treatment engagement and tobacco cessation among Oklahoma smokers living in PPCs. N = 165 Oklahoma Tobacco Helpline callers who were daily smokers 20% or more of a county’s population living in poverty for at least 30 years Oklahoma County Lung Risk reduction Compared with coaching calls and NRT alone, participants who received coaching calls plus a small FI were significantly more likely to report 7-day smoking abstinence at 8 and 12 weeks and had greater treatment engagement (more likely to complete ≥3 coaching calls and more total calls). The number of coaching calls mediated the relationship between treatment group and reported cessation at follow-ups. Study retention was high (83%) for both groups. Ledenko and Patel ( 41 ) Identify hotspots of liver cancer mortality and assess the association between these hotspots and area-level factors (e.g., poverty). All individuals living in the contiguous states of the United States from 2000 to 2020 High ( 20%) poverty for at least 30 years (every time point between 1980 and 2010) United States County Liver Mortality Both current and persistent poverty were associated with progression from a nonhotspot into a hotspot for liver cancer mortality in consecutive decades (2000–2010 and 2010–2020). Ledenko and Patel ( 42 ) Define poverty traps and examine their effect on liver mortality, including liver cancer mortality. All individuals living in the contiguous states of the United States from 2000 to 2020 Counties and census tracts with greater than 20% of the population living in poverty for three or more decades (based on US Census Bureau between 1990 and 2019) United States County and census tract Liver Mortality Poverty traps were defined as regions of multigenerational persistent poverty, that is, locations with poverty rates greater than 20% for three or more decades. The proportion of census tracts with multigenerational poverty (i.e., poverty traps) within counties was strongly associated with mortality from liver disease or liver cancer. The results showed highly significant clustering of persistent poverty and increased mortality from liver disease and liver cancer. Lima and colleagues ( 25 ) Examine the impact of persistent poverty on cancer-related outcomes among patients with hepatopancreaticobiliary (HPB) cancers. N = 41,077 patients with HPB cancers The county being consistently categorized as a high poverty area (19.5% and above) from 1980 to 2010 US County HPB Development (stage at diagnosis), treatment, mortality Patients from PPCs had lower odds of achieving an optimal outcome, lower odds of receiving surgery for early-stage disease, and higher rates of cancer-specific mortality. White patients in persistent poverty areas were more likely to present with early-stage disease and undergo surgery for localized disease than Black patients in areas without high poverty. Liu and colleagues ( 69 ) Examine the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on declines in cancer incidence and changes in incidence disparities by racial/ethnic group, socioeconomic status, rurality, and persistent poverty. Cancer cases diagnosed from SEER 22 registries, excluding Alaska and Illinois Census tracts in which at least 20% of residents have been living below the federal poverty line since 1980 United States Census tract 13 Cancer sites (female breast, prostate, lung and bronchus, colon and rectum, cervix uteri, thyroid, melanoma, pancreas, liver and intrahepatic bile duct, urinary bladder, kidney, renal pelvis, ovarian, corpus, and uterus) Development (incidence) Overall, cancer incidence rates decreased between 2015 and 2019 and in 2020, with differences by cancer sites and population groups. Larger decreases in prostate and female breast cancer incidence were found for those in persistent poverty areas compared with those in non–persistent poverty areas. The COVID-19 pandemic was associated with an overall reduction in cancer incidence and widening disparities by race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status, rurality, and persistent poverty status for most cancer sites. Madrigal and colleagues ( 36 ) Examine the relationship between living in a persistent poverty area and melanoma cancer mortality. N = 82,458 patients with melanoma 19.5% or more of individuals living in poverty, as indicated by historical and recent Census Bureau data and USDA Texas County Melanoma Mortality Adjusting for demographic factors, patients in persistent poverty areas had significantly higher incidence-based melanoma mortality than those living in transient high-poverty or never high-poverty areas. Mobley and colleagues ( 23 ) Identify geographic hotspots of late-stage breast cancer diagnosis and factors associated with these hotspots. N = 1,073,595 breast cancer cases Counties that have remained poor for two decades based on the 2000 census and 2007–2011 American Community Survey 5-year estimates United States County Breast Development (stage at diagnosis) PPCs were more likely to be persistent hotspots for late-stage breast cancer diagnosis. Moss and colleagues ( 43 ) Examine disparities in cancer mortality rates (overall and site-specific) between PPCs and non-PPCs, categorizing counties as (i) not experiencing current high poverty, (ii) experiencing current but not persistent high poverty, and (iii) experiencing current and persistent high poverty. All 3,143 US counties ≥20% of county residents living below the federal poverty level based on decennial censuses in 1980, 1990, and 2000 and the American Community Survey 2007–2011 estimates United States County All sites Mortality PPCs had higher cancer mortality than non-PPCs, both overall and for multiple type-specific mortality rates, including lung and bronchus, colorectal, stomach, and liver and intrahepatic bile duct cancers. Compared with counties facing current poverty, counties with persistent poverty had higher cancer mortality rates overall and for lung and bronchus, colorectal, breast, stomach, and liver and intrahepatic bile duct cancers. Moss and colleagues ( 44 ) Examine changes over time in disparities in cancer mortality rates (overall and site-specific) by county persistent poverty status, rurality, and racial group. N = 4,488,609 registered cancer deaths 20% or more of residents living below the federal poverty line based on decennial censuses in 1980, 1990, and 2000 and the American Community Survey (2007–2011) estimates United States County All sites Mortality Disparities in cancer mortality rates by persistent poverty remained over time (1990–1992 to 2014–2018). Mortality disparities between persistent and non-PPCs widened for breast and colorectal cancers and remained stable or mixed for others. Black residents of rural PPCs had the highest cancer mortality rates, overall and for colorectal, oropharyngeal, breast, cervical, and prostate cancers. Moss and colleagues ( 29 ) Examine the relationship between persistent poverty and cancer-related health access in the state of Pennsylvania. All 3,105 census tracts in Pennsylvania 20% or more of the population living below the federal poverty level according to the 1990 and 2000 censuses and the 2007–2011 and 2015–2019 American Community Survey 5-year estimates Pennsylvania Census tract All sites Early detection, Development (incidence) Findings on persistent poverty and healthcare outcomes were mixed. In Pennsylvania, persistent poverty census tracts had lower insured rates, lower cervical and colorectal cancer screening rates, and lower rates of cancer diagnosis (i.e., self-reported incidence rate). Persistent poverty census tracts had higher rates of breast cancer screening and healthcare check-ups in the past year. Munir and colleagues ( 34 ) Study the association among persistent poverty, race/ethnicity, and access to opioids near the end of life for patients with gastrointestinal cancer. N = 48,631 patients with advanced gastrointestinal cancer Counties with continuous high poverty (≥19.5% of the population below the federal poverty level) between 2000 and 2015 based on USDA and American Community Survey estimates United States County Gastrointestinal Survivorship (palliative end-of-life care) Patients living in persistent poverty and intermittent high-poverty counties had higher odds of filling an opioid prescription near the end of life. However, patients in PPCs received lower daily opioid doses compared with patients in never high-poverty counties. Narasimman and colleagues ( 20 ) Estimate the incidence rates of early-onset gastric cancer (EOGC) by Hispanic ethnicity, rurality, and other individual and area-level factors, including persistent poverty status. N = 43,953 patients with noncardia gastric cancer 20% or more of the census tract population living below the poverty level for about 30 years, based on the 1990 and 2000 decennial censuses and 2007–2011 and 2015–2019 American Community Survey 5-year estimates United States Census tract EOGC Development (incidence) Hispanic individuals ages 20–49 in urban persistent poverty census tracts had an increased risk of EOGC. A similar relationship was observed in rural census tracts, but it did not reach statistical significance. Papageorge and colleagues ( 24 ) Estimate the impact of persistent poverty on the diagnosis, surgical resection, and survival of patients with NSCLC, breast, and colorectal cancer. N = 522,514 patients with cancer (163,352 patients with NSCLC, 236,947 patients with breast cancer, and 122,215 patients with colorectal cancer) ≥20% of residents living below the federal poverty level between 1980 and 2015 United States County Breast, colorectal, NSCLC Development (stage at diagnosis), treatment, mortality Patients with NSCLC who are living in persistent poverty areas were significantly more likely to present with advanced-stage disease compared with patients in never high-poverty areas. Patients with NSCLC and breast cancer who are living in persistent poverty areas were significantly less likely to receive surgical resection for localized disease. Patients living in persistent poverty areas had a higher risk of cancer-specific mortality for all three cancer sites compared with those living in never high-poverty areas. Peña and colleagues ( 31 ) Evaluate whether persistent adult and child poverty and rurality are related to breast, colorectal, and lung cancer screening access for AI/AN tribes. N = 35 federally recognized AI/AN tribes 20% of the adult population (persistent adult poverty) and 20% of the child population (persistent child poverty) living below the federal poverty line for at least the past 30 years United States County Breast, colorectal, lung/bronchus Early detection Adult and child persistent poverty were significantly associated with a decreased likelihood of tribal headquarters being within 200 miles of lung cancer and CT colonography screening centers. There was no association between persistent poverty status and tribal headquarters being within 200 miles of a mammographic screening facility. Raber and colleagues ( 33 ) Assess the wellness programming needs and preferences of cancer survivors and leverage findings to increase the utilization of healthy eating and active living interventions by survivors in a persistent poverty community. Chart review: N = 413 patients; interviews: N = 31 cancer survivors A historically Black neighborhood with several persistent poverty census tracts; time points not specified Single neighborhood Not applicable All sites Survivorship Cancer survivors living in Acres Homes, a neighborhood with persistent poverty, often have complex health issues, including high rates of cardiometabolic comorbidities (obesity, high cholesterol, diabetes) and treatment-related symptoms (pain, sleep disruption, tiredness). Survivors in the neighborhood demonstrated great interest in community wellness programming, including about proper nutrition and how to safely exercise. Raber and colleagues ( 70 ) Qualitatively explore the dietary habits and nutrition security experiences of patients receiving active cancer treatment at a safety net hospital oncology program and living in a persistent poverty neighborhood. N = 11 patients undergoing active cancer treatment A historically Black neighborhood with several persistent poverty census tracts; time points not specified Single neighborhood Not applicable All sites (participants’ cancer diagnoses were breast, colon, and other) Treatment Attitudes and beliefs about diet and healthy food choices were influenced by patients’ cancer experiences; complex medical and social factors, including the high cost of healthy foods and family food norms, influenced food selection, procurement, and preparation; patients exhibited resiliency and coping with limited resources; patients primarily relied on family for nutrition/food preparation support and often perceived a lack of nutrition communication/information from oncology teams. Rawicz-Pruszyński and colleagues ( 35 ) Evaluate the influence of county‐level duration of poverty on access to minimally invasive surgery (MIS) and clinical outcomes among patients with HPB cancer receiving surgical treatment. N = 8,098 patients with HPB cancer 19.5% of residents living in poverty consistently between 1980 and 2015 United States County HPB Treatment, mortality Patients with HPB cancer living in persistent poverty areas had less access to MIS, lower odds of being discharged home, and a higher risk of 1-year mortality compared with those living in never high poverty areas. Sonawane and colleagues ( 71 ) Characterize cancer mortality trends over time (1990–2020) for PPCs and non-PPCs for 14 cancers with the highest mortality rates National Center for Health Statistics mortality data, 1990–2020 Counties with ≥20% of their population living in poverty for 30 years, based on the 1990 and 2000 decennial censuses and the 2011–2015 5-year data series from the American Community Survey United States County 14 Sites (cervix uteri, corpus and uterus-NOS, lung and bronchus, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, breast, leukemia, colon and rectum, urinary bladder, ovary, kidney and renal pelvis, pancreas, liver, oral cavity, and pharynx, prostate) Mortality Between 1990 and 2020, overall cancer mortality decreased in PPCs and non-PPCs. Over the study period, disparities in cancer mortality expanded between PPCs and non-PPCs for middle-aged adults, narrowed for adolescents and young adults, and stayed constant among older adults. Tsai and colleagues ( 37 ) Analyze 5-year colorectal cancer survival rates between Black and White patients and examine whether area-level socioeconomic status factors (e.g., persistent poverty) are associated with colorectal cancer survival in five public health districts in Georgia. N = 10,876 patients with colorectal cancer 20% or more of residents being classified as poor based on the 1980–2000 decennial census and the 2007–2011 American Community Survey 5-year estimates Georgia County Colorectal Mortality After adjusting for demographic characteristics and tumor features, living in persistent poverty areas was associated with an increased risk of colorectal cancer death among White patients, but not among Black patients. Tsai and colleagues ( 40 ) Examine the influence of persistent poverty, rurality, and the intersection between persistent poverty and rurality on early-onset colorectal cancer (EO-CRC). N = 58,200 patients with EO-CRC 20% or more of the population living below the poverty level for a period spanning approximately 30 years United States Census tract EO-CRC Mortality Overall, 5-year survival was highest for patients in nonpersistent poverty and nonrural areas (72%) and lowest for those living in poverty areas regardless of rurality (67%). Patients living in both persistent poverty and rural areas had a 1.1- to 1.5-fold increased risk of colorectal cancer death compared with patients living in nonrural areas, with especially high estimates for those aged 30–39 years. Yeary and colleagues ( 72 ) Examine the relationship between self-reported racial discrimination and engagement in healthy behaviors (fruit/vegetable intake and breast, cervical, and colorectal cancer screenings) among Black residents of rural PPCs in Arkansas. N = 251 Black adult residents of rural, PPCs in Arkansas County poverty rate of at least 20% since 1980 Arkansas County Breast, cervical, colorectal Risk reduction, early detection Among Black residents of rural PPCs in Arkansas, higher self-reported racial discrimination was associated with higher odds of cervical cancer screening. No relationship was observed between self-reported racial discrimination and other cancer screening behaviors or fruit and vegetable intake. Zhang and colleagues ( 22 ) Examine temporal and spatial trends in melanoma incidence by stage at diagnosis in the state of Texas from 2000 through 2018, with attention to demographic and geographic variation to identify high-risk populations. N = 82,462 melanoma cases based on data from all 254 Texas counties ≥20% of residents at or below the federal poverty level for the past two decennial censuses (Counties were classified as with/without persistent poverty using the US Economic Development Administration’s 2021 persistent poverty data.) Texas County Melanoma Development (incidence and stage at diagnosis) Overall, melanoma incidence in Texas increased over the study period, with non-Hispanic Whites, males, and individuals aged 50 years and older being the most at risk. Clusters of lower-than-average incidence for overall, early-stage, and late-stage melanoma seemed to overlap with PPCs (all P values 0.001). Figure 2. Year of publication of included articles. A bar chart depicting the publication year of included articles. (Search was updated in July 2025; thus, 2025 records do not include those published from August to December 2025). Most studies used the US Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service (USDA ERS) definition of persistent poverty as an area where at least 20% of the population has lived below the federal poverty level for 30 years or more ( 10 ). Twenty-two studies (62.9%) measured persistent poverty at the county level, and nine studies (25.7%) used census tracts ( Table 2 ). Twenty-two articles (62.9%) analyzed data representing the entire United States, 11 focused on a single state (31.4%), and two focused on a single neighborhood (5.7%; Table 2 ). Table 2. Characteristics of included studies. Study characteristics Total 35 included articles Persistent poverty measurement level ​ County 22 (62.9%) Census tract 9 (25.7%) Both 2 (5.7%) N/A 2 (5.7%) Geographic study setting ​ Entire United States 22 (62.9%) Single state 11 (31.4%) Single neighborhood 2 (5.7%) Study design and data source ​ Observational, large secondary dataset 30 (85.7%) Observational, primary data (survey and qualitative) 4 (11.4%) Intervention, 2-group parallel randomized controlled trial 1 (2.9%) Study design, data source(s), and funding sources Thirty studies (85.7%) reported on observational analyses using large secondary datasets. Of these studies, most analyzed data from Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) or SEER–Medicare registries. Other studies used the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s databases (e.g., US Cancer Statistics, Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System). Four studies (11.4%) reported on observational primary data (survey and qualitative) and used community-engaged research or involved a community advisory board; one study (2.9%) evaluated an intervention ( Table 2 ). Twenty-one studies (60%) cited a government source of funding (e.g., NIH, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Federal Office of Rural Health Policy, state grants). Primary outcomes across the cancer continuum Of the 35 included articles, 25 (71.4%) addressed a single outcome on the cancer continuum, either development (including incidence and stage at diagnosis), risk reduction, early detection, treatment, survivorship (including palliative end-of-life care), or mortality. Cancer mortality was the most frequently studied outcome among included studies. Fourteen studies examined two or more cancer sites, and the remainder focused on a single cancer site, including breast, colorectal, gastric/gastrointestinal, hepatopancreaticobiliary, liver, lung, melanoma, oral/pharyngeal, and prostate ( Fig. 3A ). Ten articles (28.6%) examined more than one cancer continuum outcome ( Fig. 3B ). Figure 3. A, Number of articles studying different cancer sites and ( B ) cancer continuum outcomes (out of 35 included articles). Bar charts depicting the number of included articles focused on different cancer sites and outcomes on the cancer continuum. GI, gastrointestinal. Development (incidence and stage at diagnosis) With respect to cancer incidence rates, studies found that persistent poverty was associated with higher incidence rates for several cancer sites, including lung/bronchus ( 18 ), oral and pharyngeal ( 19 ), and early-onset gastric cancer ( 20 ). Bhattacharya and colleagues ( 21 ) found higher incidence rates in persistent poverty census tracts for multiple cancer sites (cervical, colorectal, liver, lung/bronchus, oropharyngeal, and stomach), but not for breast and prostate cancer. Conversely, persistent poverty overlapped with lower-than-average incidence rates of melanoma in Texas ( 22 ). Incidence rates in persistent poverty areas often increased with rurality; in one study, lung cancer incidence was highest in rural, persistent poverty counties ( 18 ). Overall, included studies found that persistent poverty was associated with advanced-stage cancer diagnosis. Studies examining stage at diagnosis for oral and pharyngeal ( 19 ), breast ( 23 ), non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC; ref. 24 ), and multiple cancer sites ( 21 ) all found that persistent poverty increased the likelihood of late-stage diagnosis. Rurality and race intersected with persistent poverty to influence stage at diagnosis outcomes. Bhattacharya and colleagues ( 21 ) found that late-stage diagnosis rates for liver cancer in persistent poverty census tracts increased with increasing rurality. White patients in persistent poverty areas were more likely to present with early-stage disease than Black patients in areas without high poverty, highlighting the higher likelihood of advanced-stage diagnosis for Black individuals regardless of area-level socioeconomic status ( 25 ). Risk reduction Two studies addressed smoking; one study ( 18 ) found that smoking rates were highest in counties that were both rural and in persistent poverty, whereas another found that smokers in persistent poverty counties who received financial incentives in addition to cessation coaching calls reported greater smoking abstinence and treatment engagement than those who did not ( 26 ). A qualitative study ( 27 ) found that transportation, healthcare costs, limited availability of providers and services, and patient discomfort with cancer were identified as barriers to cancer prevention behaviors by clinic staff/providers, whereas community health workers and local community health events were facilitators. Early detection Included studies consistently found that living in a persistent poverty area was associated with worse access to and lower rates of common cancer screenings. Breast and colorectal cancer screenings were the most common studied. Living in a persistent poverty area was associated with lower screening rates for breast cancer in North Carolina ( 28 ) and cervical and colorectal cancer in Pennsylvania ( 29 ). Rurality intersected with persistent poverty, with one study finding lower reported screening rates for cervical, colorectal, and breast cancer in rural persistent poverty counties compared with other rural counties and urban counties ( 30 ). Both adult and child persistent poverty were significantly associated with a decreased likelihood of an American Indian and Alaska Native tribal headquarters being within 200 miles of lung cancer and CT colonography screening centers; no association was found for mammography screening proximity ( 31 ). Treatment Overall, persistent poverty was associated with worse treatment outcomes. One study ( 32 ) observed that residence in a persistent poverty census tract was associated with poorer breast cancer tumor characteristics, a higher likelihood of mastectomy (vs. lumpectomy), and a lower likelihood of breast reconstruction ( 32 ). Another study ( 24 ) found that patients with NSCLC and breast cancer living in persistent poverty areas were significantly less likely to receive surgical resection for localized disease. Survivorship Cancer survivors in a persistent poverty neighborhood frequently had complex health issues and comorbidities (e.g., obesity) coexisting with their status as cancer survivors ( 33 ). Patients with gastrointestinal cancer who are living in persistent poverty counties had higher odds of filling an opioid prescription near their end of life but received lower daily opioid doses compared with patients in counties that never experienced high poverty ( 34 ). Mortality Overall, cancer mortality was significantly higher in persistent poverty areas. Persistent poverty residence was associated with higher cancer mortality rates for patients with breast cancer ( 24 , 32 ), hepatopancreaticobiliary cancer ( 25 , 35 ), melanoma ( 36 ), colorectal cancer ( 24 , 37 – 40 ), NSCLC ( 24 ), liver cancer ( 41 , 42 ), lung cancer ( 18 ), and oral and pharyngeal cancers ( 19 ). Persistent poverty counties experienced higher cancer mortality rates than nonpersistent poverty counties, both overall and for multiple individual cancer sites ( 43 ), and disparities in cancer mortality rates by persistent poverty endured over a time period of approximately 25 years ( 44 ). Differences in cancer mortality risk by racial group were observed. One study found that White patients living in persistent poverty areas had an increased risk of colorectal cancer death compared with their counterparts in nonpersistent poverty areas, but the same did not hold for Black patients ( 37 ). In a study of the entire United States examining all cancer types, Black residents of rural, persistent poverty counties had the highest cancer mortality rates overall and for colorectal, oropharyngeal, breast, cervical, and prostate cancers ( 44 ). Urban–rural differences were observed, with one study finding that patients with oral and pharyngeal cancers in urban persistent poverty areas had higher rates of both all-cause and cancer-specific mortality than those in rural persistent poverty areas ( 19 ). Discussion The goal of this scoping review was to characterize the rapidly growing body of literature on the relationship between persistent poverty and outcomes across the cancer continuum. We aimed to assess the current scope of literature on this topic and identify gaps and opportunities for future research. Informed by the AACR cancer disparities model ( 12 ), we also sought to assess cancer disparities by persistent poverty. Based on the findings of the 35 included articles, there are significant disparities in outcomes along the cancer continuum due to persistent poverty. Residents of persistent poverty areas face higher cancer incidence and advanced-stage diagnosis rates, higher rates of smoking and barriers to cancer prevention, lower rates of cancer screening, worse treatment outcomes, higher mortality rates, poverty-related survivorship challenges, and disparities in access to end-of-life care. Persistent poverty intersects with race and rurality in several studies, with Black/African American and rural residents often, but not always, experiencing worse outcomes. The AACR cancer disparities model proposes that systemic inequities, including poverty and segregation, shape drivers of health, which leads to cancer health disparities for marginalized groups, including racial and ethnic minorities, rural residents, and those living in persistent poverty. The included studies in this scoping review clearly show that residents of persistent poverty areas, who are disproportionately Black/African American and rural, face significant and enduring disparities along the cancer continuum. Cancer mortality, persistent poverty, and race Included studies showed cancer mortality rates were consistently higher in persistent poverty areas than in nonpersistent poverty areas, with disparities disproportionately affecting Black/African American residents. Other research has similarly found that high area-level deprivation is correlated with higher cancer mortality ( 45 – 47 ). However, extant research suggests the influence of area-level deprivation on cancer mortality may differ between racial groups. Recent work found that neighborhood disadvantage contributes to higher breast cancer mortality for White women, but the association is less clear for Black women ( 48 , 49 ), suggesting that other factors may more directly link Black racial identity to higher breast cancer mortality. In this review, Tsai and colleagues found that Black residents had higher colorectal cancer mortality than White patients in regions of Georgia. However, although White patients in persistent poverty areas had a higher colorectal cancer mortality risk than their counterparts in nonpersistent poverty areas, this difference was not observed for Black patients. This suggests that area-level deprivation may not be driving the higher colorectal cancer mortality risk for Black patients. At the same time, Moss and colleagues found that Black residents of rural, persistent poverty counties had the highest cancer mortality rates of all groups examined, overall and for several individual cancer sites, suggesting a compounding effect of rural residence, persistent poverty, and Black racial identity. Future research should consider how area-level deprivation, rurality, racial identity, and cancer type interact in different settings to influence cancer mortality. Measurement and definition of persistent poverty Most articles used a county-level measure of persistent poverty, which has been in use by the USDA ERS since 1985 ( 11 ). Recently, the NCI, with support from the USDA ERS, added census tracts to SEER’s persistent poverty measures ( 21 ). The county-level measurement may obscure smaller areas of concentrated and entrenched high poverty, particularly city neighborhoods, often characterized by racial segregation and economic divestment in large metropolitan areas. Subcounty-level measurements (i.e., census tracts) of persistent poverty may allow for more targeted research and interventions. The time points used to define an area as experiencing persistent poverty varied between studies, particularly those using county-level measurement. Studies should clearly state the time points used to define persistent poverty areas and use the most recently available data whenever possible. Gaps and opportunities for future research There are several areas to consider for future research. Future work should examine policy- and institutional-level interventions to address the root causes that keep areas in persistent poverty, such as racial and economic segregation, resource deprivation, local disinvestment, and lack of education and employment opportunities. Interventions to address these structural-level inequities and drivers of poor health outcomes will require organized and empowered community members and political will ( 50 – 52 ). Such efforts will rely on building partnerships between healthcare centers/providers, community groups, and policymakers aimed at addressing SDH such as food, housing, transportation, and job insecurity. For example, innovative approaches to create access to affordable, healthy food within food deserts, such as community-supported enterprises, municipal-run grocery stores, and healthcare partnerships with local markets, have shown promise in both impoverished rural and urban settings ( 53 – 56 ); this is an area ripe for intervention research in persistent poverty areas. Relatedly, future work should better engage with theoretical frameworks to identify the structural and social determinants of cancer disparities for residents in persistent poverty areas. Conceptual frameworks outlining how social and environmental contexts influence disease risk and health outcomes (e.g., SDH, social-ecological models, fundamental cause theory, health disparities frameworks; refs. 2 , 13 , 57 – 59 ) are essential for identifying the mechanisms linking persistent poverty exposure to poor cancer outcomes. These frameworks would also highlight the need for multilevel interventions. Future studies should examine the structural factors within healthcare systems that contribute to poorer cancer outcomes for individuals in persistent poverty areas, such as insurance coverage and rural provider availability. This research is particularly salient with the increasing number of rural hospital closures and loss of essential healthcare services ( 60 ), which may exacerbate preexisting disparities in these areas. Additionally, studies might explore how state and federal policies, such as state Medicaid expansion and community health worker reimbursement, differentially affect those living in persistent poverty areas. No studies in this review assessed patient quality of life as an outcome. Research shows area-level deprivation is related to worse psychologic well-being and quality of life for patients following cancer treatment ( 61 , 62 ). Quality of life is a key patient-reported outcome and should be explored among both patients and longer-term survivors in persistent poverty areas. Intervention research is urgently needed to understand how to mitigate cancer disparities in persistent poverty areas. Current initiatives are evaluating a range of interventions from survivorship healthy behavior programs to guaranteed basic income programs ( 63 ). Additional research should evaluate the effectiveness of interventions aimed at improving access to cancer screening and treatment, such as community health worker programs, telemedicine, transportation assistance, and financial support for treatment-related costs. Strengths and limitations This review has several strengths. We characterized a rapidly growing body of research that has the potential to influence cancer prevention and control efforts in persistent poverty areas, which face a disproportionate cancer burden. To ensure rigor, we employed several strategies that are recommended as best practices for scoping reviews, including regular team meetings, defining terms, working with a research librarian, double-screening abstracts and full texts, pilot testing the data extraction template, and having two members independently extract article data, with a consensus check by a third team member ( 64 ). There are limitations to this review. It is possible that our search terms resulted in missing some articles, and our search criteria excluded conference abstracts and pieces published in the “gray literature” that have not undergone peer review. Our literature search may have omitted studies that were conducted in persistent poverty areas without explicitly using the concept of persistent poverty to define the geographic area or study population (e.g., Appalachia or the Mississippi Delta). Likewise, studies of poverty or area deprivation were excluded if they did not specifically define the duration of poverty. A full synthesis of area-level socioeconomic determinants of cancer health outcomes was beyond the scope of this review. Conclusion The findings of this review demonstrate a disproportionate cancer burden for residents of persistent poverty areas, with disparities in outcomes observed across the cancer continuum. The NCI has described poverty as a carcinogen because of its role in exacerbating cancer disparities and mortality ( 3 ). Future research should focus on structural inequities and social drivers of disparate cancer outcomes in persistent poverty areas and on designing interventions and policies to eliminate persistent poverty and promote cancer health equity for communities across the United States. Supplementary Material Supplementary Methods Supplementary Methods shows the search strategy for each database (e.g., query terms, results).